
--- PAGE 1 ---
A systematic review of solar irradiance forecasting across time horizons 
using physical, satellite, and AI-based methods
Mohammad Hasan Ghodusinejad
a
, Nasrin Rashvand
a
, Fatemeh Salmanpour
a
,  
Shaghayegh Danehkar
b
, Hossein Yousefi
a , *
a
School of Energy Engineering and Sustainable Resources, College of Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, University of Tehran, Iran
b
Doctoral candidate in Earth Resources Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Kyushu University, Japan
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Solar irradiance
Forecasting
Physical models
Data-driven methods
Numerical weather prediction
ABSTRACT
Solar energy is a key renewable resource, yet synchronizing its production with grid demand remains challenging 
due to irradiance variability. This review systematically examines the evolution of solar irradiance forecasting 
methods, from physical and numerical weather prediction (NWP) models to modern data-driven and hybrid AI- 
based approaches. It integrates analyses of All-Sky Imager (ASI) and satellite datasets and categorizes forecasting 
techniques by temporal horizons from intra-hour to multi-day forecasts. The paper uniquely contributes a 
comparative taxonomy linking forecast horizon, input data type, and model architecture to accuracy outcomes. 
The findings highlight the growing benefits of physics-informed deep learning for improving operational solar 
forecasts.
1. Introduction
With the continuous growth in population, the importance of energy 
supply has escalated significantly. It is anticipated that in the coming 
years, energy supply will become a paramount concern for countries. 
Despite the high emissions and finite nature of fossil fuels, their acces -
sibility has led to a substantial reliance on them. Therefore, it is crucial 
to identify and develop suitable alternatives, particularly renewable 
energy sources.
Solar energy is one of the renewable resources that are easily 
accessible in most parts of the world [ 1 ]. Despite the increasing adoption 
of this energy source and its relatively recent development compared to 
other renewable sources, the challenges associated with its full utiliza -
tion remain unresolved.
After the Kyoto Protocol, a coherent policy toward renewable en -
ergies has been put in place globally in order to slow down the pace of 
global warming [ 2 ]. A large number of developing and developed 
countries are investing in solar energy in order to comply with the Paris 
Agreement and relieve the extreme effects of global warming. A major 
downside of renewable energies, particularly solar energy, is related to 
uncertainties about the power generation capacity of solar systems in 
the upcoming days [ 3 ].
Over the last ten years, the capacity for electricity production from 
photovoltaic sources has surged by > 900 gigawatts, with investments in 
this sector rising by approximately 19 %. In 2021 alone, solar energy 
production capacity increased by 180 gigawatts. Key factors contrib -
uting to this progress include the reduction in storage battery costs and 
the expansion of local battery storage systems, particularly in solar 
farms and decentralized photovoltaic production [ 4 ].
The primary challenges in the solar energy sector currently involve 
the unpredictability of incoming radiation and the amount of solar en -
ergy generated over specific periods. Efforts must be made to mitigate 
these uncertainties [ 5 ].
Based on the weather conditions of a specific geographic area, pre -
dictions can be made regarding incoming solar radiation. However, due 
to potential changes and inaccuracies in the input weather data, there 
are inherent errors in these predictions. Accurate forecasting of 
incoming radiation is crucial to reduce costs and minimize the impact of 
forecast errors on ratepayers, grid operators, wind and solar farm 
maintenance crews and energy traders. These errors can lead to price 
increases, project shutdowns, or financial losses. Therefore, it is essential 
to strive for the most accurate predictions of wind and solar energy [ 6 ].
Given the inherently intermittent nature of solar energy, accurately 
forecasting its generation trends is of paramount importance. Reliable 
power generation forecasts are widely recognized by policymakers as a 
key instrument for mitigating availability challenges and ensuring grid 
stability [ 7 , 8 ]. To achieve optimal photovoltaic system utilization, 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Hosseinyousefi@ut.ac.ir (H. Yousefi). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Solar Compass
journal homep age: www. elsevier.com/ locate/sol com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solcom.2025.100154
Received 21 May 2025; Received in revised form 15 December 2025; Accepted 16 December 2025  
Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
Available online 16 December 2025 
2772-9400/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of International Solar Alliance. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
--- PAGE 2 ---
highly accurate forecasts are required. These forecasts minimize 
network fluctuations across multiple temporal horizons (long-term, 
medium-term, and short-term) [ 9 ].
For clarity of scope, this review adopts the following classification of 
forecast horizons: 
• Very-short / Intra-hour (up to 60 min): Primarily used for now -
casting, this range supports real-time voltage regulation, rapid 
energy-storage response, and short-term power smoothing.
• Short / Intra-day (1 – 6 h): Suitable for local dispatch optimization, 
near-term generation forecasting, and coordination with distributed 
storage resources.
• Day-ahead (6 – 48 h): Critical for unit commitment, market bidding, 
and resource allocation within operational planning cycles.
• Multi-day / Seasonal (beyond 48 h up to several weeks): Pertinent to 
maintenance scheduling, long-term planning, and strategic genera -
tion management [ 10 ].
This temporal differentiation is crucial because forecasting models, 
data inputs, preprocessing procedures, and evaluation metrics may vary 
substantially depending on the horizon considered.
In this systematic review, we explore the evolution of solar irradi -
ance forecasting techniques aimed at improving solar energy generation 
prediction. The reviewed methods are organized into three overarching 
categories: 
• Physical and Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) – based 
approaches
• Classical statistical and machine-learning techniques
• Modern deep-learning and hybrid frameworks
We compare these approaches across different forecast horizons, 
highlighting their respective strengths, limitations, and domains of 
applicability. Furthermore, emerging paradigms such as physics- 
informed learning frameworks, probabilistic and ensemble forecasting, 
and data-fusion methodologies integrating satellite and all-sky imager 
(ASI) observations are discussed to illuminate future research directions.
Accordingly, the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents an 
overview of solar radiation measurement techniques and forecasting 
methods. Section 3 outlines the key environmental and meteorological 
factors influencing solar irradiance. Section 4 details the various fore -
casting models, followed by an analytical comparison within Section 4 . 
Finally, Section 5 concludes the study and highlights perspectives for 
future work.
2. Measurement and forecasting
Despite the challenges in forecasting solar radiation, solar energy 
remains the most widely utilized renewable energy source, largely due 
to its seamless integration with the electricity supply network [ 11 ].
The success of any solar project hinges on the availability of accurate 
global solar radiation data. Unfortunately, due to the high cost of 
measuring equipment and technical limitations in calibration, only a 
limited number of weather stations worldwide record such data. In 
response to this challenge, researchers have explored alternative data 
generation methods. This exploration could inspire the development of 
robust forecasting techniques that integrate the strengths of existing 
models.
The operation and maintenance of photovoltaic (PV) plants are 
crucial for professionals in the solar industry. Accurate prediction of PV 
output power is essential for effective electricity planning, distribution, 
optimal management, quality assurance, and grid stability. However, 
designing precise models for PV output power prediction is challenging 
due to the inherent uncertainties caused by variations in solar radiation. 
Forecasting methods can be broadly categorized into four groups: 
physical models (such as numerical weather prediction models), statis -
tical techniques (such as AR, ARMA, ARIMA), artificial intelligence (AI) 
methods (including machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)), and 
hybrid approaches that combine two or more methods.
When considering different time scales, intra-hour forecasts (up to 1 
hour) enhance grid quality and stability, while intraday forecasts (up to 
6 h) are crucial for optimal integration. One-day forecasts are mainly 
used for unit commitment planning and dispatching capacity, whereas 
one-week forecasts are applicable in trading, management, and main -
tenance [ 12 ]. Beyond the aforementioned scenarios, over time, addi -
tional methods such as those based on sensor networks are employed, 
and their performance, errors, and advantages are thoroughly examined 
[ 13 ]. In numerous countries, extensive research has been conducted to 
identify optimal solar radiation prediction models tailored to the spe -
cific climatic conditions of each region [ 14 , 15 ].
3. Factors affecting incoming solar radiation
Multiple factors influence the amount of radiant energy in each 
geographical area. These factors have been studied extensively in 
various articles, considering their individual effects and potential in -
teractions. The key factors are stated in the following.
Nomenclature
AI Artificial Intelligence
ANN Artificial Neural Network
AR / ARMA / ARIMA Autoregressive / Autoregressive Moving 
Average / Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average
ASI All-Sky Imager
CSP Concentrated Solar Power
CSI Clear Sky Index
DNI Direct Normal Irradiance
ECMWF European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
GFS Global Forecast System
GHI Global Horizontal Irradiance
MAE Mean Absolute Error
MAPE Mean Absolute Percentage Error
MBE Mean Bias Error
nMBE normalized Mean Bias Error
CNN Convolutional Neural Networks
ML Machine Learning
MLP Multilayer Perceptron
MOS Model Output Statistics
SVM/SVR Support Vector Machine / Support Vector Regression
NWP Numerical Weather Prediction
PCA Principal Component Analysis
PM Persistence Model
PV Photovoltaic
RF Random Forest
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
rRMSE Relative Root Mean Square Error
nRMSE normalized Root Mean Square Error
CRMSE Central Root Mean Square Error
TSI Total Sky Imager
WRF Weather Research and Forecasting Model
R² Coefficient of determination
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
2 
--- PAGE 3 ---
3.1. Particulate matter
Particulate matter in the atmosphere are one of the most important 
factors affecting the solar radiation of the earth ’ s surface. In an study, 
the impact of aerosols on the precision of solar radiation forecasting was 
examined using a high-resolution, one-day-ahead operational numerical 
weather prediction (NWP) model. To isolate the effect of aerosols, the 
research focuses on clear sky periods. Severe events attributed to aero -
sols, such as dust or fog, were identified during these periods. Thus, 
accurate aerosol forecasting plays a crucial role in enhancing solar ra -
diation prediction accuracy [ 16 ].
Short-term (2 – 3-day) solar radiation forecasts play a crucial role in 
solar energy industries, particularly for yield forecasting when inte -
grating highly variable solar energy into the power grid. In regions and 
time periods focused on solar energy, cloud-free conditions prevail. 
During these times, aerosols become the main atmospheric factor 
affecting direct and global irradiance at the Earth ’ s surface. For 
example, in a five-month period in Europe, the accuracy of aerosol op -
tical depth at 550 nm (AOD550) predictions was assessed using particle 
forecasts from the CTM European Air Pollution Dispersion (EURAD) 
model [ 17 ].
Following an assessment of day- and hour-ahead solar irradiance 
prediction applications within the energy industry, aerosol optical depth 
(AOD) forecasts at 550 nm derived from a chemistry transport model 
were found to surpass ground-based measurements. Notably, sporadic 
desert dust storm events in the central Mediterranean region were 
identified as the primary source of significant inaccuracies in the model 
predictions. These AOD predictions, along with other remote sensing 
data (like Earth albedo and ozone) and numerical weather prediction 
parameters (such as water vapor and clouds), were used as inputs for a 
radiation forecasting system [ 18 ].
3.2. Cloud cover
Another important factor that have impact on the performance of a 
PV system, is the cloud covering of the sky. A 15-minute advance notice 
before cloud cover is adequate for activating backup systems and 
minimizing the reliance on electrical storage during clear-sky condi -
tions. As a test case, it is essential to assess satellite-based cloud and 
radiation data, conduct atmospheric modeling of aerosol loading, and 
perform numerical weather prediction for clouds and radiation using 
deterministic modeling and ensemble techniques. These efforts align 
with the requirements for integrating solar power into the grid [ 19 ]. For 
example, Stratocumulus clouds ( Sc ) significantly influence surface solar 
resources along the California coast, particularly where rooftop photo -
voltaic systems are prevalent. Their extensive spatial coverage, optical 
thickness, and reflectivity contribute to this variability. However, cur -
rent numerical weather prediction models lack the capability to predict 
both the presence and thickness of Sc . Consequently, validation efforts 
focus on a specific summer month in southern California, when Sc clouds 
are most common [ 20 ].
In an investigation of the impact of cloud intensity on the predicted 
global horizontal irradiance (GHI), a novel approach was introduced. 
This approach utilized satellite imagery and ground measurements as 
input data. Specifically, it relied on cloud tracking and transmission 
using an optical flow algorithm. Subsequently, at the chosen location 
(San Diego, California), the estimated cloud transport along semi-steady 
streamlines was calculated. Based on this method, radiation forecasts 
were obtained. Fig. 1 illustrates the data processing flowchart for the 
solar forecast system, which relies on the satellite radiation model [ 21 ]. 
Table 1 presents the calculated error results from this research. For 
comparison, SolarAnywhere results were included.
One challenge in predicting solar energy is the variability in solar 
penetration due to cloud cover. The Total Sky Imager (TSI) is a short- 
term irradiance forecasting method with a 5-minute forecast horizon 
for low-altitude clouds. Jin Xu et al. [ 22 ]suggested integrating NWP into 
TSI to extend the forecast horizon to 15 min. This approach aimed to 
detect multi-layer clouds and track identified cloud segments. To ach -
ieve this, three basic models with different feature combinations were 
used: the Persistence Model (PM), Linear Regressions (LRs), and Support 
Vector Machines (SVRs). The performance of each model, shown in 
Fig. 2 based on their Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), indicated that the 
SVR model performed the best, resulting in an effective irradiance 
forecasting model for 1 – 15 min predictions.
Taking into account several variables, including the clear sky index 
(Kc), solar zenith angle (SZA), and the cloud pattern in solar radiation 
prediction, it is observed that the absolute error increases as SZA and Kc 
decrease. Notably, the RMSE is notably affected by the mean and stan -
dard deviation of Kc [ 23 ].
Numerical climate prediction models frequently underestimate 
cloud cover, which results in an overestimation of GHI. By integrating 
cloud water path (CWP) data from geostationary satellites using an 
Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF), short-term GHI forecasts from the 
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model have improved in mid- 
latitude case studies [ 24 ].
In recent years, there has been ongoing development of machine 
learning models aimed at analyzing surface radiation variability in 
relation to cloud type and cloud fraction. These models employ various 
machine learning approaches, including multivariate linear regression, 
k-nearest neighbors (kNN), random forests (RF), gradient boosting ma -
chines (GBM), and multilayer perceptrons (MLP or ANN). The input 
features for these models encompass a measure of solar variability and 
the ratio of observed all-sky irradiance to estimated clear-sky irradiance, 
referred to as effective transfer (ET). Fractional sky cover (FSC) acts as a 
continuous predictor variable, whereas cloud type (CT) is considered a 
categorical variable [ 25 ].
Despite the challenges posed by cloud cover in solar radiation fore -
casting, various solutions are being explored to mitigate this error. One 
effective tool for short-term radiation forecasting is the total sky imager, 
which currently provides data at 5-minute intervals primarily due to 
low-altitude clouds. Efforts to extend its predictive horizon include 
integrating weather data from NWP at intervals ranging from 15 min to 
several days into a short-term radiation prediction model. This inte -
gration has resulted in an average improvement of 21 % compared to the 
base model [ 26 ]. Models are employed to reconstruct historical total 
Fig. 1. Schematic of data processing for the satellite-to-irradiance model based 
solar forecasting system [ 21 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
3 
--- PAGE 4 ---
solar radiation (TSI) when direct space-based measurements are un -
available [ 27 ].
3.3. Humidity
The sky transparency index, derived from relative humidity profiles 
across three atmospheric sub-layers, significantly influences global solar 
radiation. It serves as a link between solar radiation under clear sky 
conditions and cloud cover. For instance, research on the Tibetan 
Plateau indicated that convective activity in the region introduces un -
certainty in radiation estimates due to the localized and transient nature 
of these systems [ 28 ].
3.4. Wind velocity
Numerous studies have investigated the impact of wind intensity on 
incoming solar radiation and the joint assessment of these two 
parameters. For instance, Federica Davo et al. [ 29 ] employed Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA) along with two post-processing techniques 
to predict wind power in Sicily and assess solar radiation at specific 
measurement locations.
3.5. Ozone air quality
The precision of the model ’ s solar radiation forecasts is greatly 
influenced by the aerosol optical depth. When this depth surpasses 0.1, 
the model ’ s errors can be as high as 100 W/m². Conversely, for lower 
aerosol optical depths, the models ’ use of climatological attenuation 
results in solar irradiance estimates that are very close [ 30 ].
3.6. Earth
Rugged terrain introduces variability in the incoming solar radiation 
field, yet its impact remains inadequately accounted for in most nu -
merical weather prediction models. Specifically, for a horizontal sur -
face, reduced radiation has been demonstrated to decrease the root 
mean square error of the WRF model by approximately 20 % (equivalent 
to about 25 W/m²) during winter and autumn, and by 60 W/m² during 
spring and summer. Meanwhile, for a tilted surface, downscaling to 
different spatial resolutions yielded the best results at a resolution of 9 
arcseconds, with a root-mean-square error of 45 % (equivalent to 57 W/ 
m²) and an average bias error close to zero [ 31 ].
In numerous studies, researchers have explored the combined impact 
of various factors. For instance, Zhian Sun et al. [ 32 ] developed a rapid 
estimation scheme for assessing instantaneous direct solar radiation 
(DSI) at the Earth ’ s surface. Additionally, the influence of dust varies 
based on soil quality and this can clearly have impact on the solar ra -
diation [ 33 ].
4. Models for predicting solar radiation
4.1. Physical models
Developing models for accurately measuring solar radiation involves 
incorporating various meteorological parameters (such as latitude, 
longitude, and altitude) and climatic factors (including sunshine dura -
tion, humidity, transparency index, seasonal variations, temperature, 
cloudiness, wind speed, atmospheric pressure, radiation diffusion, 
global radiation, extraterrestrial radiation, and evaporation) [ 34 ]. 
Physical methods include three main approaches: sky imagery [ 35 ], 
NWP [ 36 ], and satellite-imaging [ 21 ]. The accuracy of physical models 
is significantly influenced by the interactions between the dynamic 
movement of solar radiation and the physical state. Given that photo -
voltaics and concentrated solar power (CSP) are increasingly contrib -
uting to global energy resources, there is a substantial demand for 
reliable solar energy forecasting. These forecasts are primarily gener -
ated by physical or statistical models, both of which depend on precise 
solar radiation predictions. For short- to medium-term forecast horizons 
(hours to days), radiation forecasts are predominantly provided by NWP 
models. However, despite recent advancements aimed at enhancing 
irradiance prediction in current NWP models, their quality remains 
suboptimal and is a major source of uncertainty in PV power prediction. 
Table 1 
Comparison between results from the satellite-to-irradiance models and available data from the SolarAnywhere [ 22 ].
San Diego Mean measured 
(W/m
2
)
Mean modeled 
(W/m
2
)
MBE 
(W/m
2
)
rMBE 
( %)
MAE 
(W/m
2
)
rMAE 
( %)
RMSE 
(W/m
2
)
rRMSE 
( %)
Xcor 
(-)
NOAA GHI Model 1 493.49 495.73   2.25   0.46 71.72 14.53 124.53 25.24 0.934
NOAA GHI Model 2 493.49 516.78   23.29   4.72 61.72 12.51 107.41 21.77 0.95
SUNY GHI 385.31 455.16   69.86   18.13 106.40 27.61 213.14 55.32 0.825
SUNY GHI 
(outliers removed)
415.95 439.89   23.95   5.76 64.71 15.56 130.52 31.38 0.932
Fig. 2. Comparison of different models (a), feature sets (b), and cloud tracking 
pipelines (c) for 1 – 15 min forecast [ 22 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
4 
--- PAGE 5 ---
A promising approach to improve NWP solar radiation forecasting is the 
multimodel method [ 37 ].
NWP models begin with a description of the atmospheric conditions 
at a specific time. They use equations that describe horizontal and ver -
tical momentum, hydrostatic continuity, and energy conservation, 
capturing atmospheric variability over fixed time steps. There are two 
categories of NWP models based on the spatial extent of their modeling 
domain. The first category includes global models, which cover the 
entire globe, such as the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather 
Forecasts (ECMWF) and the Global Forecast System (GFS). The second 
category includes regional or mesoscale models, which cover specific 
regions. Examples of these are the Weather Research and Forecasting 
(WRF) model, the Mesoscale Atmospheric Simulation System (MASS) 
model, the Advanced Multiscale Regional Prediction System (ARPS), the 
North American Model (NAM), and the Fifth-generation Pennsylvania 
State University-National Center for Atmospheric Research Mesoscale 
(MM5) model [ 38 ].
To broaden the application of this model, various solutions and 
methods have been explored for its implementation. Each method aims 
to reduce forecasting time from days to hours and minutes, while 
enhancing accuracy across different locations.
In 2014, short- and medium-term solar radiation forecasts were 
introduced to evaluate the accuracy of numerical weather forecasting 
models. Numerical models, such as the air pollution model (TAPM), can 
estimate GHI using standard meteorological fields, though they lack 
real-time cloud and aerosol data. To assess the model ’ s performance, the 
GHI estimated by TAPM was compared with satellite-derived GHI at 
selected sites. The results showed that the 45 km resolution had the 
lowest RMSE, indicating that the model struggles to accurately capture 
changes on scales smaller than 45 km [ 39 ].
To address these shortcomings, Mathiesen et al. [ 40 ] introduced a 
high-resolution cloud absorption model at the University of California. 
Using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, they 
implemented an operational 1.3-km grid solar forecast for San Diego, 
California, optimized to accurately simulate local meteorological con -
ditions, especially fog and marine layers during summer. They devel -
oped a direct cloud assimilation system (WRF-CLDDA) to predict 
intra-hourly variability and produce accurate cloud field initializa -
tions. By utilizing satellite imagery and ground weather station reports, 
WRF-CLDDA statistically adjusts cloud hydrometeors (water content 
and cloud water vapor) in the initial conditions.
Although numerical weather forecasting models are generally more 
accurate than image-based or statistical models, they tend to over- 
predict radiation, leading to meteorological errors. This over- 
prediction, particularly in regions with dynamic cloud systems, re -
duces forecast accuracy [ 41 ]. While these models are significant in their 
applications, they generally operate on a scale much larger than what is 
effective for network integration, particularly for accurate radiation 
prediction.
In a research in this context, to enhance variability forecasts derived 
from the 10 km coarse forecast, various methodologies, including analog 
downscaling a pattern matching algorithm utilizing a historical forecast 
library to identify groups similar to current forecasts are being explored. 
This process necessitates WRF version 3.6.2 to produce a series of 10 km 
+ 2 km nested simulations. Radiation data, accurate to ± 2 %, was 
sourced from the SURFRAD network. As indicated in Table 2 , only the 
WRF-simulated GHI aligns with the observed radiation [ 42 ].
Also, Wong et al. [ 43 ] conducted an investigation into global average 
daily radiation by examining solar radiation models for predicting 
global average daily and hourly irradiance, beam irradiance, and diffuse 
irradiance. Seven models were considered, utilizing the 
Angstrom-Prescott equation to predict global average daily radiation 
based on sunshine hours in Hong Kong. Additionally, two parametric 
models were investigated to estimate the monthly average global hourly 
radiation and forecast the hourly radiation and a comparative analysis 
was conducted between model predictions and measured data.
Subsequently, to enhance the accuracy of time step examinations, 
Junior et al.[ 44 ]. introduced a method for predicting solar radiation one 
hour in advance, utilizing numerical weather forecasts and recent 
measured data. Ultimately, irrespective of the spatial scale, the proposed 
method ’ s predictions significantly outperformed the reference pre -
dictions, demonstrating consistent performance. The skill scores ranged 
from 0.67 to 0.73 for local scales and 0.97 for regional scales. To 
examine solar radiation forecasts at 10-minute intervals, Ian 
Sosa-Tinoco [ 45 ] developed a method for producing global solar radi -
ation assessments with high spatial (9 km) and temporal (10 min) res -
olution. This method provided numerical weather forecasts based on a 
model. The simulation outputs were used to create radiation maps and 
the grid cells were compared with corresponding observations to eval -
uate the model ’ s accuracy, achieving a correlation higher than 0.88 with 
the observational data.
Although NWP models can forecast solar radiation variables, they 
often exhibit significant errors, particularly in direct normal irradiance 
(DNI), which is highly influenced by aerosol and cloud type and con -
centration. One approach to enhancing 10-minute forecasts for DNI, as 
proposed by Pereira et al. [ 46 ], involves two artificial neural network 
(ANN) models. The first model utilizes weather and aerosol variables 
predicted at a specific moment, while the second model incorporates a 
period of improved DNI forecasts prior to the forecast moment. This 
research leverages data from the ECMWF and the Copernicus Atmo -
spheric Monitoring Service. To enhance forecasting conditions and 
reduce the time required from one hour to one minute, Far Nanandez 
et al. [ 47 ] developed a method to describe the movements and 
high-frequency dynamics of DNI through the non-dimensionalization of 
solar radiation data. The results, based on two-year surveys across 
various climate points, indicate that the Kolmogorov-Smirnov integral 
parameter (KSI %) and the normalized root mean square values are 
below 23 % and 22 % per month, respectively, showing minimal dis -
crepancies between modeling and measurement.
In many high-altitude regions of the Earth, the typical coarse reso -
lution of models and the variable physical characteristics of the envi -
ronment pose challenges for the NWP method. For instance, on R ´eunion 
Island in the southwest Indian Ocean basin, these issues are evident. To 
address this, Jordi Badosa et al. [ 48 ] investigated the influence of 
large-scale atmospheric parameters on local solar radiation and its daily 
variability. To enhance forecast accuracy on the island, they introduced 
an Empirical-Statistical Downscaling (ESD) method, which relies on 
identifying similar past conditions to predict the previous day ’ s solar 
radiation. Using 12 years of ECMWF reanalysis data and measurements 
from 21 stations on the island, their results demonstrated that the ESD 
method outperforms climatology-based radiation predictions, 
improving daily RMSE by 4 – 11 %. The set of NWP methods can also be 
utilized to estimate solar radiation and wind power density, either in 
combination or separately [ 49 ].
4.1.1. Overview of physical models
Numerical Weather Prediction is one of the most effective forecasting 
methods, though selecting the appropriate model from the diverse range 
available remains a significant challenge. Consequently, numerous 
comparisons have been conducted to evaluate different NWP models 
Table 2 
Analog weights and correlation coefficients [ 42 ].
Variable w-GA Correlation Descriptive Name
GHI 0.37 0.89 Global Horizontl Irradiance
qC 0.35 0.01 Columnar Cloud Water Mixing Ratio
qR 0.19 0.00 Columnar Rain Water Mixing Ratio
qI 0.06 0.00 Columnar Ice Mixing Ratio
Prec 0.02 0.05 Surface Precipitation
qV
2m
0.01 0.22 2-m Water Vapor Mixing Ratio
Qv 0.00 0.13 Columnar Water Vapor Mixing Ratio
T
2m
0.00 0.40 2-m Temperature
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
5 
--- PAGE 6 ---
based on criteria such as RMSE and mean absolute error (MAE).
Verbois, et al., assessed 108 different models using a multi-criteria 
hybrid approach, Fourier analysis, and classification of daily radiation 
profiles based on various WRF mesoscale radiation parameters. This 
comprehensive evaluation enhanced the understanding of model dis -
tinctions and accuracy, highlighting the importance of multiple factors 
beyond model errors. The study concluded that while WRF forecasts 
were inadequate for hourly radiation resolution, they were more suit -
able for predicting daily radiation profiles [ 50 ].
In a separate study, Perez evaluated two NWP models the ECMWF 
global model and the WRF model based on the medium-scale GFS across 
three geographical regions: the United States, Canada, and Europe. The 
findings from all three studies indicate that the GFS-based WRF model 
forecasts are less accurate compared to global forecast-based approaches 
like the ECMWF, and also, a simple averaging of model outputs yields 
better results than using individual models [ 51 ].
The primary challenge in solar radiation forecasting lies in eluci -
dating the nonlinear relationship between observed and predicted ra -
diation. To address this, a transformation function is required to 
effectively communicate this relationship. According to Kakumoto et al. 
[ 52 ], the predicted NWP and observed radiation data were utilized to 
construct this function using multidimensional kernel density estimation 
(KDE). The probabilistic prediction of this joint function, derived 
through Bayes ’ law, offered superior statistical performance and reli -
ability compared to other methods. This proposed method, termed Joint 
Probability Condition (CoJD), employs the mean value in place of 
scattered data and considers the clear sky index as a direct substitute for 
radiation in measuring solar radiation. Typically, CoJD involves two 
main phases: the construction phase and the forecasting phase. During 
the construction phase, a Joint Probability Density Function (PDF) is 
created between the predicted Clear Sky Index (CSI) and the observed 
CSI using a two-dimensional KDE method. In this study, the forecasting 
phase applies the Joint PDF to EnNWP to generate a forecast PDF for CSI. 
Fig. 3 illustrates this approach. The result of the forecast method studied 
at every site is shown in Fig. 4 . For all the sites CoJD was better than 
EnReg an PP. In market trade simulation, CoJD also performed better 
than the other forecast method.
Verbois et al. [ 53 ] utilized NWP to study solar irradiance in tropical 
region. Fig. 5 depicts a network of 25 meteorological stations across 
Singapore, managed by the Solar Energy Research Institute of Singapore 
(SERIS). The evaluation was performed with a 1-hour time resolution; 
for instance, the hourly GHI for 9 am was calculated by averaging 
multiple values from 8:31 am to 9:30 am, with any missing minute-data 
being disregarded. In the next step, they used a high resolution 
implementation of WRF solar consisted of four involute domains with 
horizontal spatial resolution of 27, 9, 3 and 35 vertical levels. Lasso 
model output statics (Lasso), Analog Ensemble (AnEn) and Quantile 
Gradient Boosting (QGB) were used as post – processing models. Lasso 
and QGB both used all of the variables but AnEn only use a few of them. 
Briefly, WRF had the least accuracy, QGB had the lowest MAE which 
means QGB had more accuracy but comparing to Lasso model had too 
much outliers. After QGB and Lasso, AnEn had the lowest bias.
Over the years, advanced methods for forecasting solar radiation 
have been developed, utilizing outputs from NWP models in conjunction 
with radiative transfer operators like libRadtran. In an study, WRF-Solar 
configuration of the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model 
was employed, which is specifically tailored for solar energy applica -
tions. Parameters forecasted by WRF, such as vertical profiles of cloud 
liquid water (CLW), ice water content (IWC), cloud fraction, relative 
humidity, and temperature, are utilized as inputs for libRadtran to 
compute offline solar radiation. At each forecast interval, Gaussian 
Mixture Model (GMM) clustering was used to classify all horizontal 
networks. The classification results showed that the networks are cate -
gorized into air masses or disturbances with comparable meteorological 
properties. Satellite observation data served as references. The mean 
square error (MSE) is broken down into the mean square of the error and 
the MSE of variables centered at zero. The square root of the latter is 
known as the central root mean square error (CRMSE). Forecast data was 
analyzed over a 2-day period. The mean error did not show significant 
change until the second day, while CRMSE remained consistent only on 
the first day. This framework clarified the structure of surface solar ra -
diation forecast errors, aiding validation within the NWP model inte -
gration domain for any evolving air mass or disturbance [ 54 ].
In addition to generating electricity through large and small photo -
voltaic power plants, accurately calculating the received solar energy in 
urban areas is crucial. This urban-specific model, referred to as WRF- 
solar (uWRF-solar), demonstrates a strong predictive capability for 
GHI, with an R² value of 0.93 under clear sky conditions, 0.61 under 
cloudy sky conditions, and 0.39 under overcast conditions [ 55 ].
4.1.2. NWP model accuracy
Over the years, extensive efforts have been undertaken to identify 
the factors influencing the accuracy of NWP models. For instance, Perez 
et al. [ 56 ] evaluated seven GHI prediction models that depended 
directly or indirectly on NWP. To validate these models, ground mea -
surements, including hourly integrated GHI recorded over a one-year 
period, were analyzed from seven SURFRAD network stations. The 
seven NWP-based GHI models evaluated in this study include the Global 
Multiscale Environmental Model (GEM), the ECMWF model, two ver -
sions of the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, the MASS 
model, the Advanced Multiscale Regional Prediction System (ARPS) 
model, and a model based on cloud cover forecasts from the US National 
Forecast Database (NDFD). These models provide forecasts up to 48 h, 
except for the ECMWF model, which forecasts up to three days, and the 
NDFD model, which forecasts up to seven days. The models were 
compared with ground measurements using RMSE, MAE, MBE, and the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov integral (KSI). Models based on the European or 
Canadian Global Climate Simulation (GEM & ECMWF) demonstrated 
Fig. 3. Schematic illustration of CoJD [ 52 ].
Fig. 4. Comparison of forecast methods [ 52 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
6 
--- PAGE 7 ---
superior RMSE results. Combining GEM and ECMWF models yielded 
better outcomes compared to using them individually. GFS-based 
models were tested with and without MOS postprocessing, which cor -
rects local errors. Tests incorporating MOS showed improved perfor -
mance, while non-MOS experiments highlighted the limitations of 
GFS-based model radiation algorithms.
The necessity to accurately predict solar radiation is driven by the 
initial and ongoing costs associated with all stages of solar energy uti -
lization. Minimizing forecasting errors ensures that costs remain close to 
actual values. Sun [ 57 ] proposed an effective plan for predicting solar 
radiation under various weather conditions, relying on components of 
both clear and cloudy skies. Input variables were assessed through 
climate conditions and satellite observations within the NWP model, 
which serves as an offline plan for GHI calculation using satellite data. 
The results confirmed that this study can reduce net solar radiation error 
from 800 W/m² to < 50 W/m². Additionally, results indicated that the 
average half-hour relative error of GHI is reduced to < 7 % under 
different sky conditions.
Upon examining the factors contributing to the inaccuracy of NWP 
models, it was identified that the type of cloud cover in the study area is 
a significant factor. For instance, marine stratus clouds are a primary 
source of inaccuracy in NWP models for coastal California. Proper 
parameterization, along with accurate initial datasets, significantly en -
hances the accuracy of simulated cloud fields and surface solar radiation 
[ 58 ]. Accurate solar radiation forecasting significantly contributes to 
precise operating cost estimations. However, achieving higher accuracy 
entails additional costs. In a research, to balance the optimal error 
margin with the costs of calculations and implementation, a three-hour 
forecasting period was considered. This interval may introduce errors in 
radiation forecasts, and simulations with lower resolution at high fre -
quency may also experience inaccuracies due to humidity and velocity 
variations caused by atmospheric flow and clouds [ 59 ].
To mitigate the impact of cloud cover on NWP models, improve -
ments are necessary. Consequently, many researchers have contributed 
to enhancing forecast accuracy by developing various approaches. For 
example, to reduce errors caused by cloud variability, researchers sug -
gested that a model can be developed by first adopting a seasonal 
approach and then analyzing cloud change patterns that affect radiation 
in the target area. Using a seasonal and climate-dependent approach 
(MOS), this model can reduce the relative root mean square error 
(rRMSE) of GHI by 6 % compared to the original model, demonstrating 
the effectiveness of an intelligent model [ 60 ].
PV modules are influenced by the spectral distribution of solar ra -
diation. While Numerical Weather Prediction models compute radiation 
across multiple spectral bands, the standard outputs for PV forecasting 
typically provide only bandwidth values. This raises concerns about how 
the absence of detailed spectral data impacts PV power estimation. To 
investigate this, a physical PV model was created to determine the 
spectral distribution of radiation and the panels ’ spectral response. This 
model was tested using data collected at the Site Instrumental de 
Recherche par T ´el ´ed ´etection Atmosph ´erique (SIRTA) in Palaiseau, 
France. The average relative difference between the simulated and 
measured PV power for a 250 W monocrystalline silicon module is   0.9 
%, with an average bias of   2.0 W.This model was employed to explore 
how solar zenith angle and cloud cover affect PV module performance. 
The results revealed that in cloudy conditions, PV performance can 
improve by up to 5 % through spectral filtering of near-infrared radia -
tion, and by up to 18 % when only beneficial radiation is considered in 
performance calculations. Overall, global broadband horizontal irradi -
ance is inadequate for precise PV power modeling, highlighting the 
importance of spectrally and angularly refined irradiances. This un -
derscores the importance of PV models using more precise irradiance 
inputs, which can be easily obtained by utilizing the internal variables of 
NWP models [ 61 ].By integrating Data Assimilation (DA) with Numerical 
Weather Prediction model observations, the issues related to incomplete 
initial atmospheric information for predictions can be mitigated in both 
static (3DVAR) and time-evolving (4DVAR) modes. This method was 
evaluated for its effectiveness in forecasting hourly conditions for the 
next day, and when applied to the WRF model, it demonstrated minimal 
error in time evolution under all conditions except clear skies. For 
instance, the initial 4DVAR forecasts, after processing, exhibited supe -
rior performance with a relative RMSE of 37 % over the Singapore study 
area [ 62 ].
In another study, to enhance the model ’ s accuracy, a method 
involving the integration of three data sets, i.e., NWP model data, sat -
ellite survey data and ground-collected information, was employed. The 
Fig. 5. SERIS network of meteorological stations operational since May 2013 [ 53 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
7 
--- PAGE 8 ---
implementation of this method required three steps including Classifi -
cation and Clustering (utilizing the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to 
classify and cluster horizontal grid cells within the study area), CDF 
Analysis (Applying the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm to 
examine the cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the trans -
parency index (CI) derived from satellite observations and NWP data for 
predicting hourly radiation) and Correction Function Determination 
(determining the corresponding correction functions based on the 
inferred CDFs for each region clustered in step 1). Finally, corrections 
were applied to the CI of the NWP forecast data for days (d) and ( d + 1) 
( Fig. 6 ). Mean Bias Error (MBE), RMSE, and Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 
were utilized to assess forecasting accuracy. Consequently, the algo -
rithm demonstrated a superior correction effect in spring and summer 
compared to winter, by accounting for seasonal behavior [ 63 ].
Although NWP models provide a robust physical basis for solar 
irradiance prediction, their accuracy is limited by coarse spatial reso -
lution and imperfect aerosol and cloud parameterization; post- 
processing methods such as MOS or statistical downscaling can sub -
stantially reduce forecast errors particularly when correcting aerosol- 
related biases and improving terrain representation.
4.2. Statistical methodology
Statistical approaches encompass a number of traditional statistical 
methodologies, including regression analysis [ 64 ], autoregressive 
models [ 65 ], Markov Chain [ 66 ], and machine learning methodologies, 
such as support vector machine (SVM) [ 67 ] and ANN [ 68 ]. Accuracy of 
the statistical approaches is highly contingent upon the historical data 
and bears no relation to the internal state information of the solar system 
[ 69 ]. By evaluating all accuracy metrics, including RMSE, MBE, MAE, 
and the coefficient of determination (R²), it is evident that all machine 
learning models enhance the accuracy of regional GHI predictions [ 70 ]. 
Comparative analyses of various statistical models including Neural 
Networks (NN), Multivariate Regression (MVR), and Support Vector 
Machines (SVM) using Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) and 
Mean Squared Error (MSE) criteria for short-term (one-hour-ahead) 
irradiance forecasting based on ground-measured meteorological inputs 
(temperature, humidity, and cloud index) indicate that NN models 
slightly outperform MVR and SVM under similar data conditions [ 71 ]. 
However, this superiority depends on the forecast horizon, data quality, 
and local climatic variability.
To investigate the amount of incoming radiation in various countries 
under the influence of different parameters, numerous studies have 
employed this method. For instance, Sabzi Peror et al. [ 72 ] conducted a 
study to examine various influential parameters on the monthly average 
solar radiation index, considering factors such as altitude, the amount of 
suspended dust on different days of the month, and the seasonal varia -
tion in the Earth-Sun distance. They developed an altitude-dependent 
method incorporating these parameters and tested it in the central 
arid deserts of Iran. The results demonstrated that this modified altitude 
method achieved an error rate of < 2 % and exhibited high prediction 
accuracy in arid and semi-arid deserts globally, with effective general -
ization to the conditions in Iran.
Olimar et al. [ 73 ] conducted an investigation into the changes in 
solar radiation in the southern region of Algeria, taking into account the 
climatic conditions. They analyzed 10 years of solar radiation data from 
2011 to 2020. Their findings revealed significant seasonal and annual 
variability, highlighting the region ’ s substantial solar energy potential, 
with an average daily energy measurement exceeding 6.16 kWh/m² and 
an annual average of 2.2 MWh/m².
In highly accurate solar power forecasting using statistical methods, 
it is important to reduce the risk of serious errors (especially over -
estimation). Takamatsu et al. [ 74 ] addressed this subject by developing 
low risk models with good average accuracy through the following 
approach: adoption of a machine learning ensemble, and optimization of 
the metamodel using quadratic programming with downsampled vali -
dation data.
4.2.1. Regression analysis
Regression analysis is an approach in forecasting solar irradiance. 
For instance, a linear regression model is introduced as a post-processing 
method to minimize errors from the Weather Research and Forecasting 
(WRF) model. The coefficients of the regression model are updated using 
the Kalman Filter (KF) approach, enabling the model to adjust dynam -
ically to changes in solar radiation. The KF updating formula is then 
altered to account for measurement availability constraints during 
forecast execution. WRF forecasts include inputs such as radiation, 
temperature, relative humidity, and solar zenith angle. Fig. 7 shows a 
logistic distribution censored at zero [ 75 ].
In another work, Lauret et al. [ 76 ] developed simple linear models 
that allow users to predict solar irradiance forecast errors based solely 
on solar variability at a specific location on Earth. Sixty sites distributed 
around the globe were used to build two types of RMSE prediction 
models. The first type was for intra-day forecasts (1-hour to 6-hour 
forecast horizons), while the second is for day-ahead forecasts 
(24-hour horizon). The derivation of the intra-day forecast error pre -
diction model leverages on a non-linear time series approach whereas 
the one for day-ahead forecast error relies on forecasts issued by the 
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF).
Khan et al. [ 77 ] introduced novel hybrid architectures and presented 
a detailed evaluation of GHI prediction models. The approach included 
traditional machine learning algorithms (Support Vector Regressor, 
Decision Tree Regressor, and Random Forest Regressor) and novel 
hybrid deep learning architectures (BiLSTM-BiGRU and CNN-LSTM). 
The novel cascaded BiLSTM-BiGRU architecture used complete bidi -
rectional processing. The CNN-LSTM framework effectively combined 
spatial and temporal features. These advanced architectures achieved a 
30 % reduction in computational complexity compared to equivalent 
standalone deep learning approaches, enhanced robustness to missing or 
noisy data, and controlled seasonal variations.
4.2.2. Artificial intelligence techniques
Throughout the history of solar energy forecasting, ambient satellites 
have measured solar energy reflected from the Earth or atmosphere. 
Consequently, satellite-based methods are now well-established, and 
extensive research has been conducted to address their limitations [ 78 ]. 
Recent studies have also incorporated machine learning methods and 
artificial intelligence techniques.
Fig. 6. CI of the NWP forecast data for days (d) and ( d + 1) [ 64 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
8 
--- PAGE 9 ---
To demonstrate the positive impact of employing artificial intelli -
gence techniques, Khadija Barhmi et al. [ 79 ] conducted a comprehen -
sive review of various solar irradiance forecasting methods based on 
satellite data, all-sky imagery (ASI), sensor networks, NWP models, and 
hybrid approaches. By analyzing more than eighty studies, the authors 
proposed a comprehensive framework for the classification and evalu -
ation of forecasting methods, utilizing common performance indicators 
such as RMSE, MAE, MBE, and the forecast skill index (FS) to assess 
model accuracy. Their findings reveal that the integration of artificial 
intelligence particularly deep neural networks (CNN, LSTM, GAN) and 
hybrid learning strategies significantly enhances forecasting precision 
over short- to medium-term horizons. Furthermore, the study un -
derscores the crucial role of data preprocessing for noise reduction and 
postprocessing for bias correction and performance refinement, high -
lighting how AI-driven methodologies can profoundly elevate the ac -
curacy and reliability of solar forecasting systems.
To evaluate the effectiveness of artificial intelligence – based ap -
proaches, numerous studies have compared their performance against 
traditional forecasting methods under identical operating conditions. 
For instance, Shanlin Chen et al. [ 80 ] investigated a deep lear -
ning – based model chain developed for intra-day solar irradiance fore -
casting. In the first stage, spectral satellite data from GOES-16 and 
ground-based measurements from the SURFRAD network were used to 
train a model capable of producing highly accurate spatial estimations of 
GHI, referred to as the SAT-DL model. In the subsequent stage, these 
spatial estimates served as inputs to a second model designed to generate 
short-term temporal forecasts of GHI (ranging from 15 to 180 min 
ahead) using convolutional neural networks (CNNs), attention layers, 
and dense layers within the TensorFlow framework. For performance 
benchmarking, NSRDB data derived from physical radiative transfer 
models were employed. Evaluation metrics such as nRMSE, nMBE, the 
coefficient of determination (R²), and ramp event analysis demonstrated 
that the proposed deep learning model chain outperformed benchmark 
models (including hybrid physical – deep learning and end-to-end net -
works), particularly under cloudy conditions. Although the approach 
demands greater computational resources and access to ground-based 
data, it offers substantial potential for enhancing solar forecasting ac -
curacy and advancing intelligent energy management systems.
In this context, Sediqi et al. [ 81 ] utilized time-lapse videos from a 
wide-lens camera, analyzing one million images spanning 1 to 12 years, 
to predict solar radiation using a deep learning approach. Fig. 8 illus -
trates the Convolutional Neural Network and Long Short-Term Memory 
(CNN-LSTM) model proposed by these researchers. This method com -
prises two stages: the first stage involves a CNN to encode a frame from a 
Fig. 7. Proposed scheme of one-day-ahead PV power forecasting [ 75 ].
Fig. 8. The proposed CNN + LSTM approach based architecture [ 77 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
9 
--- PAGE 10 ---
sky video, creating a full-sky representation with the help of auxiliary 
weather data. The second stage employs a two-tier LSTM architecture to 
analyze historical full-sky representations and generate future pre -
dictions. This deep learning approach, when compared to satellite-based 
methods, significantly lowers the normalized mean absolute percentage 
error for both nowcasting (predicting solar irradiance at the moment the 
frame is captured) and forecasting (predicting irradiance up to 4 h in 
advance).
Fathi et al. [ 82 ] also assessed the viability of a rooftop solar photo -
voltaic system for a hotel building and utilized monthly data from 1984 
to 2023 and hybrid models comprising LSTM-based and GRU-based 
architectures, along with the MLP model and the standard forecasting 
methods, to forecast solar radiation and temperatures.
Forecast accuracy directly impacts operational efficiency each 1 % 
reduction in forecasting error (RMSE) can translate into approximately 
0.5 – 1 % improvement in PV plant energy scheduling efficiency and 
reduced reserve capacity costs, leading to more stable grid integration. 
Xiaoyan Shao et al.[ 83 ]. shown that more accuracy can be achieved by 
combining the individual forecasting models using a machine learning 
model. In Fig. 9 , schematic of this proposed combining is represented.
However, existing statistical and machine learning algorithms are 
not reliable for forecasting due to the sparse nature of solar energy data. 
Several factors affect the performance of solar radiation, such as the 
forecast horizon, weather classification, and performance evaluation 
criteria. Therefore, an overview of the performance of deep learning- 
based solar radiation forecasting models is presented in separate clas -
sifications. Based on the analysis, deep learning models outperform 
conventional models in solar forecasting applications, especially in 
combination with some techniques that enhance feature extraction. In 
addition, the use of data augmentation techniques is beneficial to 
improve the performance of deep learning, especially for deep networks 
[ 84 ].
4.2.3. Horizon-based suitability
Recent comparative studies show that image-based deep learning 
(CNN, ConvLSTM) and optical-flow methods excel at very-short term 
(minutes to 1 hour) nowcasting, while NWP-augmented ML or hybrid 
physical-ML methods perform better for horizons > 1 – 6 h and up to 
multi-day forecasts. For example, Ajith et al. [ 85 ]report superior per -
formance of sky-image DL for sub-hour horizons, whereas satel -
lite + NWP + DL pipelines reduce error for intra-day and day-ahead 
horizons.
To address the high levels of uncertainty inherent in photovoltaic 
energy, an increasing number of studies have focused on short-term or 
nowcasting solar forecasting. Most of these works employ deep learning 
models to directly predict solar irradiance or photovoltaic power based 
on sequences of sky images. Recently, however, advances in generative 
modeling have introduced a new paradigm that divides the nowcasting 
problem into two sub-tasks: (1) future event prediction, involving the 
generation of forthcoming sky images; and (2) irradiance or power 
estimation, which predicts solar values from a single image.
Among these approaches, the SkyGPT model has shown that its 
strength lies primarily in the estimation component rather than in image 
generation. Building on this, Lorenzo F. C. Varaschin et al. [ 86 ] 
concentrated on the irradiance estimation task, systematically evalu -
ating a wide range of deep learning architectures using the well-known 
Folsom, SIRTA, and NREL datasets. Their work also included ablation 
studies to test different training setups and data preprocessing tech -
niques, such as the choice of target variables and time-label alignment 
between sky images and irradiance measurements. Notably, they iden -
tified a potential timestamp misalignment in the Folsom dataset and 
proposed a correction strategy. Across all three datasets, their results 
consistently confirmed the reliability and generalizability of their find -
ings across different solar observation sites.
In summary, it can be stated: 
(1) Very-short term (seconds – 60 min): sky-image DL and optical- 
flow-based methods yield the best nowcasting accuracy.
(2) Short term (1 – 6 h): hybrid ML + NWP and post-processed NWP 
(AnEn, MOS) provide better forecasts by leveraging synoptic 
evolution.
(3) Medium to long term ( > 6 h – days): global NWP ensembles 
(ECMWF) with statistical downscaling remain the primary 
choice. These distinctions are supported by comparative studies 
and benchmarks [ 85 , 86 ]
4.2.4. Climate/Regional suitability
Model performance is strongly influenced by climatic conditions. In 
particular, NWP models tend to show varying accuracy depending on 
the dominant regional weather regimes. For example, coastal and 
stratocumulus-dominated regions often pose significant challenges for 
conventional cloud microphysics and cloud – radiation parameteriza -
tions within NWP systems. In such areas, models can benefit substan -
tially from higher-resolution simulations (e.g., WRF) combined with 
advanced statistical or machine-learning-based postprocessing tech -
niques to better represent local cloud variability and short-term solar 
irradiance fluctuations [ 51 ].
Conversely, in arid and semi-arid regions, where dust storms and 
other aerosol events frequently occur, the dominant source of uncer -
tainty shifts from cloud representation to aerosol – radiation interactions. 
In these environments, improved skill is obtained through aerosol-aware 
modeling approaches or the use of aerosol data assimilation methods 
that integrate satellite or ground-based observations [ 80 ].
Finally, machine learning (ML) models that are trained on local sky 
imagery or radiation patterns often exhibit limited transferability across 
different climatic zones. This is because the spectral, radiative, and 
cloud-formation characteristics can vary dramatically between humid 
coastal areas and dry continental regions. Therefore, to maintain 
generalization and model robustness, regional retraining, climate- 
specific adaptation, or transfer-learning techniques are strongly rec -
ommended [ 87 ].
4.2.5. Complexity vs latency tradeoffs
There exists a practical trade-off between model complexity and 
operational latency in predictive modeling. More sophisticated archi -
tectures such as Transformers, ConvLSTMs, or multimodal ensemble 
models often achieve lower RMSE (higher predictive accuracy). 
Fig. 9. General schematic showing the architecture of the machine learning 
based model blending forecast system [ 78 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
10 
--- PAGE 11 ---
However, these gains usually come at the cost of greater computational 
requirements and higher inference latency, which can limit their us -
ability in real-time or resource-constrained environments.
In contrast, simpler approaches including persistence models, 
ARIMA, or lightweight Random Forests may deliver less accurate pre -
dictions, but they are typically faster, more stable, and easier to deploy 
in operational systems where low latency or limited computational ca -
pacity is critical [ 86 , 88 ].
4.2.6. Neural network
In forecasting solar radiation, ANN are utilized because they can 
learn from historical data to make the required predictions. The key 
input data influencing the availability and intensity of solar radiation 
include the month, day, season, average ambient temperature, and 
average relative humidity (RH) [ 89 ]. A generalized regression neural 
network is used to predict solar radiation. For training the neural 
network, meteorological satellite and geographical data were employed 
for short-term and long-term periods. The network ’ s input layer were 
meteorological satellite and geographic data such as longitude, latitude, 
altitude, month, and average earth surface temperature, with solar ra -
diation as the output. The root mean square error and the correlation 
coefficient between the predicted and actual values were calculated 
using the neural network outputs [ 90 ].
Various models have been created and evaluated to forecast hourly 
solar radiation one day ahead using artificial neural network techniques. 
The projected radiation is the primary factor affecting the panel array of 
modules in a photovoltaic power plant. When comparing pure statistical 
models, which depend solely on locally measured data, with methods 
that adjust numerical weather prediction data using a stability model, it 
is found that statistical models can improve forecasting performance 
[ 91 , 92 ].
Cloud cover is one of the most critical variables in solar irradiance 
forecasting. Accurate predictions of cloud cover changes can provide 
valuable information for companies and systems utilizing solar energy. 
McCandless et al. [ 93 ] proposed a short-range solar irradiance fore -
casting method that uses a statistical classification of cloud regimes to 
enhance deterministic GHI predictions. Their study utilized surface 
weather observations, solar irradiance measurements, and GOES-East 
satellite data. The prediction method utilized a regime-dependent 
approach to forecast over intervals of 0, 60, 120, and 180 min. To 
calculate the clearness index, various inputs and multi-regime depen -
dent prediction methods were employed. Fig. 10 illustrates the rela -
tionship between these techniques. From left to right, the first prediction 
method is the ANN, applied to the clear dataset. The second is an ANN 
without additional regime classification. The remaining methods are 
RD-ANNs. The first RD-ANN method, called RD-ANN-GCT, is based on 
regimes identified by cloud type changes in the GOES-East data. The 
next method, RD-ANN-GKTCC, uses k-means regimes incorporating in -
puts from all data sources in this study. The final technique, named 
RD-ANN-KtCC, involves satellite measurements and compares previous 
work.
Zibo Dong et al.[ 94 ]. investigated the hourly solar irradiance time 
series using satellite image analysis combined with a hybrid exponential 
smoothing state space (ESSS) model and an ANN. The ESSS model was 
employed to predict the cloud cover index, given the stochastic nature of 
cloud formation. To estimate solar irradiance from the cloud index, a 
MLP was selected from various ANN models. Satellite images were 
sourced from the Geostationary weather satellite operated by the Japan 
Meteorological Agency (JMA), and the solar irradiance time series data 
were obtained from the meteorological station of the Solar Energy 
Research Institute of Singapore (SERIS). The satellite images collected 
were thoroughly analyzed to determine the cloud cover index using 
self-organizing maps. Two critical threshold tests were then applied to 
the satellite images: the visible reflectance threshold test and the 
infrared temperature threshold test. For the visible reflectance threshold 
test, image data from one year were utilized to create monthly synthetic 
raster images of surface albedo. The infrared temperature threshold test 
used two temperature sources: the monthly minimum sea surface tem -
perature and the monthly mean minimum land temperature from the 
National Environment Agency of Singapore, to generate monthly syn -
thetic raster images of surface temperature. Fig. 11 displays the 
normalized RMSE for all models. The proposed model in this study 
demonstrated a 6 % improvement in accuracy compared to other 
models.
4.3. Combined method
Ensemble models, due to their reduced constraints compared to in -
dividual models, often yield more accurate results than statistical and 
physical models. Over the past three decades, numerous researchers 
Fig. 10. Overall process design for our regime-dependent prediction technique and the comparison techniques [ 83 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
11 
--- PAGE 12 ---
have continuously strived to enhance the accuracy of solar radiation 
predictions. This section outlines methods for estimating solar energy 
potential at specific locations by integrating various solar radiation 
calculation techniques. This innovative approach, which incorporates 
regional climatic conditions, significantly reduces computation time and 
enhances decision-making accuracy with minimal initial data. Addi -
tionally, it examines the impact of spatial orientation on the maximum 
electricity generation over monthly, seasonal, and annual periods, 
demonstrating that optimal tilt angles during specific times can maxi -
mize the region ’ s solar potential [ 95 ]. As an example, surface meteo -
rological data from the DATSAV2 database allow for the application of 
the METSTAT (meteorological/statistical) model to compute hourly 
values of normalized direct, horizontally diffuse, and global horizontal 
solar radiation for locations worldwide [ 96 ].
To forecast GHI, researchers have proposed several hybrid methods. 
Marquez et al. [ 97 ] utilized processed satellite images in combination 
with an ANN to develop a new hybrid approach for predicting GHI at 
intervals of 30, 60, 90, and 120 min. The forecast model was applied to 
GHI data collected from Davis and Merced locations in the San Joaquin 
Valley. The ANN model inputs included cloud fraction variables derived 
from satellite image analysis, such as velocimetry and cloud indexing. 
The proposed forecasting methods showed a relative improvement 
ranging from 5 % to 25 %. Additionally, as the forecasting horizon 
increased, the RMSE improvement also increased. In another study, de 
Lima et al. [ 98 ] predicted GHI over short- and medium-term horizons 
using the Global Forecast System (GFS), the Weather Research and 
Forecasting-Solar (WRF-Solar) model, and a hybrid method called 
GFS-MOS for the Northeast of Brazil. The GFS-MOS combines GFS 
forecasts with the Model Output Statistics (MOS) algorithm, which uses 
observational data for statistical refinement. The results demonstrate 
that GFS-MOS outperforms WRF-Solar in most aspects, particularly in 
simulating low GHI values, where GFS-MOS demonstrated superior 
accuracy.
Post-processing methods have widely been employed as correction 
models to enhance the accuracy of NWP solar irradiance forecasts. Based 
on the analysis of NWP GHI error characteristics, errors in NWP GHI 
forecasts may show obvious seasonal variations. Therefore, it is chal -
lenging for a single correction model to achieve good correction per -
formance and strong seasonal robustness. Hence, Dou et al. [ 99 ] 
proposed a hybrid model comprising representation learning module, 
feature sparse activation module, and encoder-decoder-based correction 
module to address the aforementioned problem.
Ansong et al. [ 100 ] presented a hybrid deep learning model 
combining convolutional neural networks (CNN) with long short-term 
memory (LSTM) networks to forecast solar irradiance 60 min ahead. 
The model used images from the Karlsruhe low-cost sky imager (KALiSI) 
alongside meteorological data from a local weather station. Experi -
mental results showed that including relative humidity and wind di -
rection yields the lowest average RMSE of 119 W/m² and MAE of 82 
W/m². This outperformed image-only and persistence models by 3 % 
and 42 % in RMSE (9 % and 50 % in MAE), respectively.
A new combined Model Output Statistics (MOS) method, known as 
the MOS cascade, was created to improve the global horizontal radiation 
forecasts produced by the WRF model. This approach used a sequence of 
two different MOS algorithms. The first algorithm, MOSRH, is a 
physically-based method aimed at correcting moisture-related errors in 
WRF radiation schemes. The second algorithm, MOSNN, leverages 
artificial intelligence to address systematic and learnable errors in nu -
merical weather predictions. By comparing 1-day and 2-day forecast 
accuracy with observed radiation data, a significant reduction in error 
was observed when using the MOSRH model and the MOS cascade 
[ 101 ].
Dong et al. [ 102 ] proposeed a novel zero-shot multimodal learning 
framework for predicting global horizontal irradiance. The proposeed 
framework integrates satellite images and numerical time series data. 
First, a pre-trained Vision Transformer was employed to extract feature 
embeddings from satellite images. Meanwhile, the temporal information 
from historical irradiance and relevant variables are captured using an 
iTransformer. Second, a filtering cross-attention mechanism was intro -
duced to eliminate inter-modal redundant information and enhance the 
modal fusion capability. Finally, a multivariate shared multi-layer per -
ceptron (MLP) was used to achieve multi-step prediction. his paper in -
troduces a method based on fully convolutional neural networks (U-Net) 
to interpolate missing time steps for both deterministic and probabilistic 
solar irradiation forecasts. The model is trained on deterministic fore -
casts (ECMWF IFS) to restore hourly forecasts from three-hourly fore -
casts benefiting from past physical NWP model runs. We show that the 
proposed method is capable of restoring deterministic forecasts and 
furthermore can provide highly accurate probabilistic solar irradiation 
forecast interpolations
Real-time solar radiation predictions can be made using either ma -
chine learning or physics-based models, each offering unique benefits 
Fig. 11. nRMSE ( %) comparison among 5 forecasting methods for SERIS data [ 84 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
12 
--- PAGE 13 ---
and drawbacks. To overcome these limitations, a new predictive ana -
lytics framework was introduced, combining the strengths of both model 
types. This framework, particularly a thrust conceptual model, in -
tegrates satellite cloud imagery with real-time solar radiation data to 
improve prediction accuracy. Initial results, derived from actual radia -
tion and cloud data, validate the effectiveness of this conceptual drift- 
based approach. The findings suggest that static models are inade -
quate for accurately capturing solar radiation dynamics under both 
cloudy and clear conditions [ 103 ].
Solar energy is extensively used in both residential and industrial 
applications. To maximize its utilization, measuring radiation per unit 
area is crucial. Irradiance measurements are taken at numerous stations. 
When radiation data is missing, empirical models are often used. For 
instance, Holland et al. [ 104 ] created a 48-hour forecasting system for 
two PV power plants in China and Germany. This system combines NWP 
models with irradiance and power measurements, along with 
satellite-based irradiance forecasts. Various GHI forecasts were merged 
into a single forecast using linear regression, which was then applied to 
PV simulation. The resulting PV power predictions were compared with 
on-site power measurements, and Root Mean Square Error was used to 
assess the accuracy of the irradiance and PV power predictions ( Fig. 12 ).
The conventional method for photovoltaic forecasting depends 
heavily on extensive historical data, including records of PV plant power 
generation and numerical weather prediction data, which makes it un -
suitable for newly established PV plants. To overcome this limitation, a 
physical forecasting approach based on solar radiation on inclined sur -
faces was proposed, as depicted in Fig. 13 . This method employs three 
decomposition models and four displacement models, resulting in a total 
of 12 combined forecasting models. The enhanced model also took into 
account factors such as solar spectral response, radiation angle, and soil 
coefficient. The predicted PV power was then calculated using these 
derived prediction models along with the mathematical model of the PV 
cell. The performance of the 12 models was assessed using RMSE and 
MAE under four different weather conditions: sunny, cloudy, overcast, 
and rainy days. The evaluation revealed that the Liu-Jordan transfer 
model combination methods demonstrated superior prediction accuracy 
across these weather conditions. Notably, the Erbs + Liu-Jordan model 
yielded the most accurate predictions [ 105 ].
Machine learning techniques have become increasingly popular in 
various forecasting applications. For example, U ˘gur Ercan [ 106 ] focused 
on predicting solar radiation for all cities in Turkey ’ s Mediterranean 
region using both statistical and common machine learning methods. 
The performance of these models was evaluated using ensemble learning 
methods such as gradient boosting and extreme gradient boosting, along 
with artificial neural networks. Data from eight cities in the Mediter -
ranean region of Turkey were utilized, with input variables including 
deviation angle, wind speed, ambient temperature, relative humidity, 
and cloud index. The findings reveal that machine learning models 
outperformed statistical models. The extreme gradient boosting method 
delivered the best results, achieving an R² of 0.9993 and a MAPE of 
0.0119.
4.4. Pros and cons of physical vs AI models and the importance of hybrid 
approaches
Physical models (NWP) are physically consistent and suited to 
medium-to-long horizons but suffer from cloud/aerosol parameteriza -
tion and coarse resolution; AI models (ML/DL) excel at capturing local 
nonlinearities and very short-term variability but require representative 
training data and may not generalize across climates. Hybrid methods 
that fuse NWP/satellite physics with ML postprocessing or multimodal 
DL provide a pragmatic compromise improving accuracy and reducing 
systematic biases, as demonstrated in recent studies [ 88 ].
Fig. 12. Integration of multiple GHI predictions as simulation input and comparison with measured power [ 104 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
13 
--- PAGE 14 ---
5. Conclusion
Solar irradiance forecasting is pivotal for the integration of solar 
energy into the power grid, as it addresses the inherent variability and 
uncertainty associated with solar power generation. This review has 
examined the progression of forecasting methods from traditional 
physical models to modern data-driven approaches, highlighting the 
strengths and limitations of each technique.
Physical models, such as Numerical Weather Prediction, offer a 
foundational understanding of atmospheric processes but often fall short 
in accuracy for short-term forecasts due to their reliance on large-scale 
atmospheric data. Statistical models, while useful in identifying pat -
terns in historical data, tend to struggle with capturing the nonlinear and 
dynamic nature of solar irradiance, especially over short time horizons. 
In contrast, AI and ML methods, particularly deep learning, have shown 
great promise in improving forecast accuracy by effectively handling 
complex, nonlinear relationships between meteorological variables.
The review also emphasized the importance of integrating various 
data sources, such as satellite imagery and ASIs, into forecasting models. 
These integrations help to overcome the limitations of individual data 
sources and enhance the overall prediction accuracy, particularly for 
short-term and very short-term forecasts. Hybrid approaches that 
combine physical models with AI techniques have emerged as particu -
larly effective, leveraging the strengths of both to produce more reliable 
forecasts.
Despite these advancements, challenges remain, particularly in the 
accurate forecasting of solar irradiance under varying atmospheric 
conditions, such as cloud cover and aerosol presence. The review un -
derscores the need for continued research into improving the resolution 
and accuracy of forecasting models, including the development of more 
sophisticated hybrid models and the integration of real-time data for 
adaptive forecasting.
In conclusion, while significant progress has been made in solar 
irradiance forecasting, ongoing advancements in AI, data integration, 
and hybrid modeling are essential to further enhance the reliability and 
precision of these forecasts. Future research should focus on refining 
these methods, exploring new data sources, and addressing the 
challenges posed by complex atmospheric phenomena to support the 
growing reliance on solar energy in global power grids.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mohammad Hasan Ghodusinejad: Writing – review & editing, 
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. 
Nasrin Rashvand: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, 
Investigation. Fatemeh Salmanpour: Writing – original draft, Meth -
odology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Shaghayegh Danehkar: 
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. 
Hossein Yousefi: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project 
administration, Data curation.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] N. Rashvand, et al., Optimizing solar energy-based energy consumption in 
atrium-designed residential buildings: an economic, environmental, and energy- 
centric evaluation, Results Eng. 29 (2026) 108570 .
[2] B. Johansson, Security aspects of future renewable energy systems – A short 
overview, Energy 61 (2013) 598 – 605 .
[3] M. David, M. Diagne, P. Lauret, Outputs and error indicators for solar forecasting 
models, in: Proceedings of the World Renewable Energy Forum (WREF)., 2012 .
[4] A. J ¨ager-Waldau, Snapshot of photovoltaics – February 2022, EPJ photovolt. 13 
(2022) 9 .
[5] M.A. Russo, et al., Forecasting the inevitable: a review on the impacts of climate 
change on renewable energy resources, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 52 
(2022) 102283 .
[6] E. Novakovskaia, C. Hayes, C. Collier, Spatial pattern classification for more 
accurate forecasting of variable energy resources, in AGU Fall Meet. Abstr. 
(2014) .
[7] M. Alanazi, A. Alanazi, A. Khodaei, Long-term solar generation forecasting. 2016 
IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition (T & D), IEEE, 
2016 .
Fig. 13. Structure diagram of the PV power forecasting [ 91 ].
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
14 
--- PAGE 15 ---
[8] C.L. Dewangan, S. Singh, S. Chakrabarti, Solar irradiance forecasting using 
wavelet neural network. 2017 IEEE PES Asia-Pacific Power and Energy 
Engineering Conference (APPEEC), IEEE, 2017 .
[9] S. Alessandrini, et al., A gridded solar irradiance ensemble prediction system 
based on WRF-solar EPS and the analog ensemble, Atmos. (Basel) 14 (3) (2023) 
567 .
[10] N.Y. Hendrikx, et al., All sky imaging-based short-term solar irradiance 
forecasting with long short-term memory networks, Sol. Energy 272 (2024) 
112463 .
[11] E. Sharma, W. Elmenreich, A review on physical and data-driven based 
nowcasting methods using sky images, in: Advances in Information and 
Communication: Proceedings of the 2021 Future of Information and 
Communication Conference (FICC), 2, Springer, 2021 .
[12] A. Mellit, An overview on the application of machine learning and deep learning 
for photovoltaic output power forecasting. Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference On Electronic Engineering and Renewable Energy Systems: ICEERE 
2020, Springer, Saidia, Morocco, 13-15 April 2020, p. 2021 .
[13] D.S. Kumar, et al., Solar irradiance resource and forecasting: a comprehensive 
review, IET Renew. Power Gener. 14 (10) (2020) 1641 – 1656 .
[14] K. Ulgen, A. Hepbasli, Solar radiation Models. Part 1, Rev. Energy Sources 26 (5) 
(2004) 507 – 520 .
[15] C.K. Pandey, A.K. Katiyar, Solar radiation: models and measurement techniques, 
J. Energy 2013 (2013) 305207 .
[16] K.-i. Shimose, et al., Impact of aerosols on the forecast accuracy of solar 
irradiance calculated by a numerical weather prediction model, Eur. Phys. J. 
Spec. Top. 223 (12) (2014) 2621 – 2630 .
[17] H. Breitkreuz, et al., Short-range direct and diffuse irradiance forecasts for solar 
energy applications based on aerosol chemical transport and numerical weather 
modeling, J. Appl. Meteorol. Climatol. 48 (9) (2009) 1766 – 1779 .
[18] H. Breitkreuz, Solar irradiance forecasts for energy applications. The influence of 
aerosols on the visible range; solare strahlungsvorhersagen fuer 
energiewirtschaftliche Anwendungen, Einfluss von Aerosolen auf sol. 
Strahlungsangebot Eur. (2008) .
[19] Schroedter-Homscheidt, M., et al., Nowcasting and forecasting of solar irradiance for 
solar energy electricity grid integration . 2009.
[20] H. Yang, J. Kleissl, Preprocessing WRF initial conditions for coastal stratocumulus 
forecasting, Sol. Energy 133 (2016) 180 – 193 .
[21] L. Nonnenmacher, C.F. Coimbra, Streamline-based method for intra-day solar 
forecasting through remote sensing, Sol. Energy 108 (2014) 447 – 459 .
[22] J. Xu, et al., Solar irradiance forecasting using multi-layer cloud tracking and 
numerical weather prediction, in: Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM 
Symposium on Applied Computing, 2015 .
[23] S. Cros, et al., Reliability predictors for solar irradiance satellite-based forecast, 
Energies 13 (21) (2020) 5566 .
[24] F. Kurzrock, et al., Evaluation of WRF-DART (ARW v3. 9.1. 1 and DART 
Manhattan release) multiphase cloud water path assimilation for short-term solar 
irradiance forecasting in a tropical environment, Geosci. Model Dev. 12 (9) 
(2019) 3939 – 3954 .
[25] L.D. Riihimaki, et al., Improving prediction of surface solar irradiance variability 
by integrating observed cloud characteristics and machine learning, Sol. Energy 
225 (2021) 275 – 285 .
[26] J. Xu, et al., Solar irradiance forecasting using multi-layer cloud tracking and 
numerical weather prediction. Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium 
on Applied Computing, Association for Computing Machinery, Salamanca, Spain, 
2015, pp. 2225 – 2230 .
[27] T. Chatzistergos, A discussion of implausible total solar-irradiance variations 
since 1700, Sol Phys 299 (2) (2024) 1 – 31 .
[28] K. Yang, T. Koike, Estimating surface solar radiation from upper-air humidity, 
Sol. Energy 72 (2) (2002) 177 – 186 .
[29] F. Dav `o, et al., Post-processing techniques and principal component analysis for 
regional wind power and solar irradiance forecasting, Sol. Energy 134 (2016) 
327 – 338 .
[30] R.J. Zamora, et al., The accuracy of solar irradiance calculations used in 
mesoscale numerical weather prediction, Mon. weather rev. 133 (4) (2005) 
783 – 792 .
[31] J.A. Ruiz-Arias, et al., A high-resolution topographic correction method for clear- 
sky solar irradiance derived with a numerical weather prediction model, J. Appl. 
Meteorol. Climatol. 50 (12) (2011) 2460 – 2472 .
[32] Z. Sun, A. Liu, Fast scheme for estimation of instantaneous direct solar irradiance 
at the Earth ’ s surface, Sol. Energy 98 (2013) 125 – 137 .
[33] M. Blal, et al., A prediction models for estimating global solar radiation and 
evaluation meteorological effect on solar radiation potential under several 
weather conditions at the surface of Adrar environment, Measurement 152 
(2020) 107348 .
[34] S. Mohanty, P.K. Patra, S.S. Sahoo, Prediction and application of solar radiation 
with soft computing over traditional and conventional approach – A 
comprehensive review, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 56 (2016) 778 – 796 .
[35] H. Yang, et al., Solar irradiance forecasting using a ground-based sky imager 
developed at UC San Diego, Sol. energy 103 (2014) 502 – 524 .
[36] P.J. Mathiesen, C. Collier, J.P. Kleissl, Development and validation of an 
operational, cloud-assimilating numerical weather prediction model for solar 
irradiance forecasting. Energy Sustainability, American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, 2012 .
[37] P. Kr ˇc, K. Eben, E. Pelik ´an, Clustering weather situations with respect to 
prediction of solar irradiance by multiple NWP models. ECAI 2014, IOS Press, 
2014, pp. 1207 – 1208 .
[38] E.W. Law, et al., Direct normal irradiance forecasting and its application to 
concentrated solar thermal output forecasting – A review, Sol. Energy 108 (2014) 
287 – 307 .
[39] A. Dehghan, et al., Evaluation and improvement of TAPM in estimating solar 
irradiance in Eastern Australia, Sol. Energy 107 (2014) 668 – 680 .
[40] Mathiesen, P.J., C. Collier, and J.P. Kleissl, Development and validation of an 
operational, cloud-assimilating numerical weather prediction model for solar 
irradiance forecasting . 2012. p. 955 – 964.
[41] P. Mathiesen, C. Collier, J. Kleissl, A high-resolution, cloud-assimilating 
numerical weather prediction model for solar irradiance forecasting, Sol. Energy 
92 (2013) 47 – 61 .
[42] P. Mathiesen, D. Rife, C. Collier, Forecasting solar irradiance variability using the 
analog method. 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 
IEEE, 2016 .
[43] L.T. Wong, W.K. Chow, Solar radiation model, Appl Energy 69 (3) (2001) 
191 – 224 .
[44] J.G.d.S.F. Junior, et al., Local and regional hour-ahead forecasts of solar 
irradiance with training data selection and support vector regression, IEEJ Trans. 
Power Energy 136 (12) (2016) 898 – 907 .
[45] I. Sosa-Tinoco, et al., Validation of a global horizontal irradiation assessment 
from a numerical weather prediction model in the south of Sonora – Mexico, 
Renew Energy 90 (2016) 105 – 113 .
[46] S. Pereira, P. Canhoto, R. Salgado, Development and assessment of artificial 
neural network models for direct normal solar irradiance forecasting using 
operational numerical weather prediction data, Energy AI 15 (2024) 100314 .
[47] C.M. Fern ´andez-Peruchena, et al., Increasing the temporal resolution of direct 
normal solar irradiance series in different climatic zones, Sol. Energy 115 (2015) 
255 – 263 .
[48] J. Badosa, et al., Reliability of day-ahead solar irradiance forecasts on Reunion 
Island depending on synoptic wind and humidity conditions, Sol. energy 115 
(2015) 306 – 321 .
[49] J.-M. Yeom, et al., Exploring solar and wind energy resources in North Korea with 
COMS MI geostationary satellite data coupled with numerical weather prediction 
reanalysis variables, Renew. sustain. energy rev. 119 (2020) 109570 .
[50] H. Verbois, et al., Beyond quadratic error: case-study of a multiple criteria 
approach to the performance assessment of numerical forecasts of solar irradiance 
in the tropics, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 117 (2020) 109471 .
[51] R. Perez, et al., Comparison of numerical weather prediction solar irradiance 
forecasts in the US, Can. Eur. Sol. Energy 94 (2013) 305 – 326 .
[52] M. Kakimoto, et al., Probabilistic solar irradiance forecasting by conditioning 
joint probability method and its application to electric power trading, IEEE Trans. 
Sustain. Energy 10 (2) (2018) 983 – 993 .
[53] H. Verbois, A. Rusydi, A. Thiery, Probabilistic forecasting of day-ahead solar 
irradiance using quantile gradient boosting, Sol. Energy 173 (2018) 313 – 327 .
[54] T. Watanabe, H. Takenaka, D. Nohara, Framework of forecast verification of 
surface solar irradiance from a numerical weather prediction model using 
classification with a gaussian mixture model, Earth Space Sci. 7 (11) (2020) 
e2020EA001260 .
[55] H. Gamarro, J.E. Gonzalez, L.E. Ortiz, On the assessment of a numerical weather 
prediction model for solar photovoltaic power forecasts in cities, J Energy Resour 
Technol 141 (6) (2019) 061203 .
[56] R. Perez, et al., Evaluation of numerical weather prediction solar irradiance 
forecasts in the US, in: preparation (to be presented at the 2011 ASES Annual 
Conference), 2011 .
[57] Z. Sun, et al., Parameterization of instantaneous global horizontal irradiance: 
cloudy-sky component, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos. 117 (D14) (2012) .
[58] I. L ´opez-Coto, et al., Comparison between several parameterization schemes in 
WRF for solar forecasting in coastal zones, in: SOLAR Conference Proceedings, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 2013 .
[59] A.A. Prasad, M. Kay, Assessment of simulated solar irradiance on days of high 
intermittency using WRF-solar, Energies 13 (2) (2020) 385 .
[60] J.F. Mejia, M. Giordano, E. Wilcox, Conditional summertime day-ahead solar 
irradiance forecast, Sol. Energy 163 (2018) 610 – 622 .
[61] N. Lindsay, et al., Errors in PV power modelling due to the lack of spectral and 
angular details of solar irradiance inputs, Sol. Energy 197 (2020) 266 – 278 .
[62] R. Huva, H. Verbois, W. Walsh, Comparisons of next-day solar forecasting for 
Singapore using 3DVAR and 4DVAR data assimilation approaches with the WRF 
model, Renew Energy 147 (2020) 663 – 671 .
[63] T. Watanabe, H. Takenaka, D. Nohara, Post-processing correction method for 
surface solar irradiance forecast data from the numerical weather model using 
geostationary satellite observation data, Sol. Energy 223 (2021) 202 – 216 .
[64] D. Yang, et al., Very short term irradiance forecasting using the lasso, Sol. Energy 
114 (2015) 314 – 326 .
[65] D. Yang, et al., Solar irradiance forecasting using spatio-temporal empirical 
kriging and vector autoregressive models with parameter shrinkage, Sol. Energy 
103 (2014) 550 – 562 .
[66] G. Pamparana, et al., Studying the integration of solar energy into the operation 
of a semi-autogenous grinding mill. Part I: framework, model development and 
effect of solar irradiance forecasting, Min. Eng 137 (2019) 68 – 77 .
[67] F. Wang, et al., Generative adversarial networks and convolutional neural 
networks based weather classification model for day ahead short-term 
photovoltaic power forecasting, Energy convers. manag. 181 (2019) 443 – 462 .
[68] V. Sharma, et al., Short term solar irradiance forecasting using a mixed wavelet 
neural network, Renew Energy 90 (2016) 481 – 492 .
[69] J. Antonanzas, et al., Review of photovoltaic power forecasting, Sol. energy 136 
(2016) 78 – 111 .
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
15 
--- PAGE 16 ---
[70] T. Takamatsu, et al., Regional solar irradiance forecast for Kanto region by 
support vector regression using forecast of meso-ensemble prediction system, 
Energies 14 (11) (2021) 3245 .
[71] R. Sabzehgar, D.Z. Amirhosseini, M. Rasouli, Solar power forecast for a residential 
smart microgrid based on numerical weather predictions using artificial 
intelligence methods, J. Build. Eng. 32 (2020) 101629 .
[72] A.A. Sabziparvar, A simple formula for estimating global solar radiation in central 
arid deserts of Iran, Renew Energy 33 (5) (2008) 1002 – 1010 .
[73] I. Oulimar, et al., Statistical study of global solar radiation in the Algerian desert: 
a case study of Adrar town, Theor Appl Clim. (2024) 1 – 12 .
[74] T. Takamatsu, et al., Day-ahead solar irradiance forecasting with low risk via 
downsampled metamodel optimization, Sol. Energy 301 (2025) 113990 .
[75] S. Suksamosorn, N. Hoonchareon, J. Songsiri, Post-processing of NWP forecasts 
using Kalman filtering with operational constraints for day-ahead solar power 
forecasting in Thailand, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 105409 – 105423 .
[76] P. Lauret, et al., A simple method for quickly estimating solar irradiance forecast 
errors, Sol. Energy 301 (2025) 113821 .
[77] A.W. Khan, et al., Novel hybrid BiLSTM-BiGRU and CNN-LSTM architectures for 
enhanced solar irradiance forecasting in semi-arid climates, Int. J. Electr. Power 
Energy Syst. 172 (2025) 111380 .
[78] S.D. Miller, et al., Short-term solar irradiance forecasting via satellite/model 
coupling, Sol. Energy 168 (2018) 102 – 117 .
[79] K. Barhmi, et al., A review of solar forecasting techniques and the role of artificial 
intelligence, Solar 4 (1) (2024) 99 – 135 .
[80] S. Chen, et al., Improved satellite-based intra-day solar forecasting with a chain of 
deep learning models, Energy Convers. Manag. 313 (2024) 118598 .
[81] T.A. Siddiqui, S. Bharadwaj, S. Kalyanaraman, A deep learning approach to solar- 
irradiance forecasting in sky-videos. 2019 IEEE Winter Conference On 
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), IEEE, 2019 .
[82] M. Fathi, et al., Enhanced global solar irradiance and temperature forecasting for 
rooftop PV power generation prediction using multi-step LSTM and GRU based 
hybrid models, Energy Convers. Manag.: X (2025) 101351 .
[83] X. Shao, S. Lu, H.F. Hamann, Solar radiation forecast with machine learning. 
2016 23rd International Workshop On Active-Matrix Flatpanel Displays and 
Devices (AM-FPD), IEEE, 2016 .
[84] A.M. Assaf, et al., A review on neural network based models for short term solar 
irradiance forecasting, Appl. Sci. 13 (14) (2023) 8332 .
[85] M. Ajith, M. Martínez-Ram ´on, Deep learning algorithms for very short term solar 
irradiance forecasting: a survey, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 182 (2023) 113362 .
[86] L.F.C. Varaschin, D. Silva, Benchmarking deep learning methods for irradiance 
estimation from sky images with applications to video prediction-based 
irradiance nowcasting, Sol. Energy 302 (2025) 114000 .
[87] F. Pand ˇzi ´c, T. Capuder, Advances in short-term solar forecasting: a review and 
benchmark of machine learning methods and relevant data sources, Energies 17 
(1) (2024) 97 .
[88] V. Abad-Alcaraz, et al., Multimodal deep learning for solar radiation forecasting, 
Appl Energy 393 (2025) 126061 .
[89] Kalogirou, S.A., S. Michaelides, and F.S. Tymvios, Prediction of maximum solar 
radiation using artificial neural networks . 2002.
[90] O. S ¸ enkal, M. S ¸ ahin, V. Pes ¸ temalci, The estimation of solar radiation for different 
time periods, Energy Sources A: Recovery Util. Environ. Eff. 32 (13) (2010) 
1176 – 1184 .
[91] C. Cornaro, et al., Twenty-four hour solar irradiance forecast based on neural 
networks and numerical weather prediction, J Sol Energy Eng 137 (3) (2015) 
031011 .
[92] C.K. Kim, et al., Toward improved solar irradiance forecasts: comparison of the 
global horizontal irradiances derived from the COMS satellite imagery over the 
Korean Peninsula, Pure Appl. Geophys. 174 (2017) 2773 – 2792 .
[93] T. McCandless, et al., Regime-dependent short-range solar irradiance forecasting, 
J. Appl. Meteorol. Climatol. 55 (7) (2016) 1599 – 1613 .
[94] Z. Dong, et al., Satellite image analysis and a hybrid ESSS/ANN model to forecast 
solar irradiance in the tropics, Energy Convers. Manag. 79 (2014) 66 – 73 .
[95] Y. Daus, V. Kharchenko, I.V. Yudaev, Solar radiation intensity data as basis for 
predicting functioning modes of solar power plants. Handbook of Research on 
Renewable Energy and Electric Resources For Sustainable Rural Development, IGI 
global, 2018, pp. 283 – 309 .
[96] W. Marion, R. George, Calculation of solar radiation using a methodology with 
worldwide potential, Sol. Energy 71 (4) (2001) 275 – 283 .
[97] R. Marquez, H.T. Pedro, C.F. Coimbra, Hybrid solar forecasting method uses 
satellite imaging and ground telemetry as inputs to ANNs, Sol. Energy 92 (2013) 
176 – 188 .
[98] F.J.L.d. Lima, et al., Evaluation of the short and medium-term forecast quality of 
global solar irradiance from GFS-MOS and WRF-Solar models for the northeast 
region of Brazil, Energy Rep. 13 (2025) 2187 – 2203 .
[99] W. Dou, et al., A hybrid correction framework using disentangled seasonal-trend 
representations and MoE for NWP solar irradiance forecast, Appl Energy 397 
(2025) 126295 .
[100] M. Ansong, et al., Improving sky image-based short-term solar irradiance 
forecasting through the integration of meteorological data, Energy Rep. 14 (2025) 
4111 – 4124 .
[101] M. Pierro, et al., Model output statistics cascade to improve day ahead solar 
irradiance forecast, Sol. Energy 117 (2015) 99 – 113 .
[102] C. Dong, et al., ZSIF: a zero-shot solar irradiance forecasting model based on 
satellite images and numerical series, Sustain. Energy Grids Netw. (2025) 102044 .
[103] J. Wojtkiewicz, S. Katragadda, R. Gottumukkala, A concept-drift based predictive- 
analytics framework: application for real-time solar irradiance forecasting. 2018 
Ieee International Conference On Big Data (big Data), IEEE, 2018 .
[104] N. Holland, et al., Solar and PV forecasting for large PV power plants using 
numerical weather models, satellite data and ground measurements. 2019 IEEE 
46th Photovoltaic specialists Conference (PVSC), IEEE, 2019 .
[105] C. Cui, et al., Evaluating combination models of solar irradiance on inclined 
surfaces and forecasting photovoltaic power generation, IET Smart Grid 2 (1) 
(2019) 123 – 130 .
[106] U. Ercan, A. Kocer, Prediction of solar irradiance with machine learning methods 
using satellite data, Int. J. Green Energy (2024) 1 – 10 .
M.H. Ghodusinejad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Solar Compass 17 (2026) 100154 
16 