
--- PAGE 1 ---
The role of nanotechnology and artificial intelligence in optimizing thermal 
energy systems
Hayder I. Mohammed
a
, Farhan Lafta Rashid
b
, Hussein Togun
c
, Ephraim Bonah Agyekum
d , e , j
,  
Arman Ameen
f , *
, Karrar A. Hammoodi
g
, Rujda Parveen
k
, Saif Ali Kadhim
h
, Walaa N. Abbas
b , i
a
Department Of Cooling And Air Conditioning Engineering, Imam Ja ’ afar Al-Sadiq University, Baghdad, Iraq
b
Department of Petroleum Engineering/College of Engineering, University of Kerbala, Karbala 56001, Iraq
c
Thi-Qar Technical College, Southern Technical University, Basrah, Iraq
d
Department of Nuclear and Renewable Energy, Ural Federal University Named after the First President of Russia, Boris Yeltsin, 19 Mira Street, Ekaterinburg 620002, 
Russia
e
Western Caspian University, 31, Istiglaliyyat Street, AZ1001, Baku, Azerbaijan
f
Department of Building Engineering, Energy Systems and Sustainability Science, University of G ¨avle, 801 76 G ¨avle, Sweden
g
Department College of Engineering, University of Al Maarif, Al Anbar, 31001, Iraq
h
College of Mechanical Engineering, University of Technology- Iraq, Baghdad, Iraq
i
Air Conditioning Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Warith Al-Anbiyaa University, Karbala 56001, Iraq
j
Istanbul Okan University, Tuzla Campus, 34959 Tuzla, Istanbul, Turkey
k
Chongqing Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Chongqing, 401329, China
HIGHLIGHTS
• Integrates nanotechnology and AI to optimize thermal energy system performance.
• Analyses nano-enhanced PCMs and nanofluids for energy storage and heat transfer.
• Reviews AI algorithms for predictive control and efficiency in thermal systems.
• Identifies research gaps in scalability, cost, and material sustainability.
• Proposes future research roadmap for AI-nano hybrid energy solutions.
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Energy efficiency
Nanofluids
Phase change materials
Machine learning in energy systems
Energy storage optimization
ABSTRACT
The growing demand for clean energy and the limitations of conventional thermal systems necessitates the 
integration of advanced technologies to enhance efficiency, adaptability, and sustainability. This review critically 
examines recent advancements in the application of nanotechnology and artificial intelligence for optimizing 
thermal energy systems, including solar collectors, heat exchangers, and latent heat storage units. Nanotech -
nology (particularly the use of nano-enhanced phase change materials and nanofluids such as Al ₂ O ₃ and CuO) has 
shown to improve thermal conductivity by up to 28.8 %, accelerating energy absorption and storage rates. 
Concurrently, artificial intelligence algorithms, especially artificial neural networks and particle swarm opti -
mization, enable predictive modelling, real-time system control, and fault detection, with some models achieving 
prediction accuracies above 97 % under complex operational conditions. The review emphasizes the synergistic 
potential of combining these technologies to create intelligent, self-regulating thermal energy systems. However, 
the paper also identifies critical challenges including computational overhead, cost of nanoparticle synthesis, 
lack of reproducibility in artificial intelligence implementations, and insufficient validation under extreme 
scenarios. Commercial deployment case studies (such as artificial intelligence-driven phase change material- 
based heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems in smart buildings) are discussed to illustrate prac -
tical viability, reporting energy savings of up to 28 % with return-on-investment periods under three years. The 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: hayder.i.mohammad@garmian.edu.krd (H.I. Mohammed), farhan.lefta@uokerbala.edu.iq (F.L. Rashid), hussein-tokan@stu.edu.iq (H. Togun), 
arman.ameen@hig.se (A. Ameen), karrar.hammoodi@uoa.edu.iq (K.A. Hammoodi), rujdaparveen07@gmail.com (R. Parveen), 20292@uotechnology.edu.iq
(S.A. Kadhim), walaa.n@uokerbala.edu.iq (W.N. Abbas). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Energy
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/apene rgy
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2025.126576
Received 21 May 2025; Received in revised form 16 July 2025; Accepted 2 August 2025  
Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
Available online 8 August 2025 
0306-2619/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
--- PAGE 2 ---
paper concludes by proposing integrated research directions that combine multiscale material innovation with 
robust artificial intelligence training on dynamic datasets. This dual approach is essential to developing scalable, 
cost-effective, and resilient thermal energy systems capable of supporting global energy transitions.
1. Introduction
With escalating environmental concerns, the rising worldwide en -
ergy demand has created an urgent need for more efficient and sus -
tainable energy systems [ 1 ]. Fossil fuels dominate the energy sector and 
are rapidly diminishing, and have considerable detrimental effects on 
the environment, exacerbating climate change via greenhouse gas 
emissions [ 2 ]. This has compelled civilizations to pursue alternate en -
ergy sources that are both renewable and more ecologically sustainable. 
Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydropower have 
become prominent because of their capacity to reduce environmental 
pollution substantially. Nonetheless, the intrinsic problems of these 
energy sources, like intermittency and reduced energy densities, need 
the development of sophisticated technology to enhance their efficiency 
and viability. Within this framework, two essential technologies have 
arisen: nanotechnology and Artificial Intelligence (AI) [ 3 ]. These tech -
nologies provide potential solutions to improve the efficiency and reli -
ability of Thermal Energy Systems (TESs). This analysis examines the 
contributions of nanotechnology and AI in enhancing TESs, emphasizing 
energy efficiency and sustainability improvements [ 4 ].
TESs are important in the utilization of renewable energy resources. 
They convert energy from renewable sources like solar or wind into 
thermal energy for a number of uses, like electricity generation, heating, 
and cooling [ 5 ]. Solar energy is the most common and widely utilised 
kind of renewable energy. Solar thermal systems, such as the Solar 
Water Heating System (SWHS) and the Flat Plate Solar Collector (FPSC), 
on the other hand, are systems that are used to harvest and store solar 
energy for use later [ 6 ]. These systems are important in the reduction of 
fossil fuel dependency as they provide a clean source of energy. Another 
challenge that TESs face is how to achieve maximum efficiency. As a 
renewable energy source, solar power is inconsistent and has low energy 
density compared to fossil fuels, thus the a need for energy storage and 
conversion for successful implementation [ 7 ]. FPSCs are extensively 
used for water heating applications. These devices trap solar radiation 
and transmit the absorbed thermal energy to a working fluid, such as 
water or air [ 8 ].
Notwithstanding its prevalent use, the thermal efficiency of FPSCs is 
often constrained by elements such as heat losses and the intrinsic 
characteristics of the working fluids. Researchers have investigated 
many approaches to improve solar collectors’ thermal efficiency, 
including using nanofluids as working fluids [ 9 ]. The heat transfer ef -
ficacy of solar collectors can be significantly improved by nanofluids, 
which are fluids that are infused with nanoparticles that exhibit 
exceptional thermal conductivity [ 10 ]. Research has demonstrated that 
the integration of nanofluids, such as Al
2
O
3
, CuO, and TiO
2
, into FPSCs 
can substantially enhance the efficacy of the overall system and the rate 
of heat transfer. Tiwari et al. [ 11 ] demonstrated that the thermal 
Nomenclature
Abbreviation
ACO Ant Colony Optimization
AI Artificial Intelligence
ANFIS Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System
ANN Artificial Neural Network
BPNN BackPropagation Neural Network
CPSS Cyber-Physical-Social Systems
CSA Cuckoo Search Algorithm
DL Deep Learning
DRL Deep Reinforcement Learning
DQNs Deep Q-Networks
EEPS Energy and Electric Power Systems
FFNN Feedforward Neural Networks
FM Forecasting Model
FPSC Flat Plate Solar Collector
GA Genetic Algorithms
GAN Generative Adversarial Network
GBR Gradient Boosting Regressor
GM Generalised Modelling
GOA Grasshopper Optimisation Algorithm
GPR Gaussian Process Regression
HVAC Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
IoT Internet of Things
ITES Ice Thermal Energy Storage
LHTES Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
KNN K-Nearest Neighbours
KPI Key Performance Indicator
MAE Mean Absolute Error
MAPE Mean Absolute Percentage Error
ML Machine Learning
MLP Multi-layer Perceptron
MPC Model Predictive Control
MSE Mean Squared Errors
MWCNT Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotube
M-GPR Gaussian Processing Regression Model
NePCM Nano-enhanced Phase Change Material
ODNN Optimized Deep Neural Network
PCM Phase Change Material
PSO Particle Swarm Optimisation
PV Photovoltaic Panels
PV/T Photovoltaic/Thermal
PI Prediction Interval
QRF Quantile Random Forest
RAE Relative Absolute Error
RBF Radial Basis Function
RF Random Forest
RL Reinforcement Learning
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
SA Simulated Annealing
SL Supervised Learning
SMR Small Modular Reactor
SSL Semi-Supervised Learning
SVR Support Vector Regression
SWHS Solar Water Heating System
SWCNT Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube
TES Thermal Energy System
TIC Theil Inequality Coefficient
VAE Variational Autoencoder
WNN Wavelet Neural Networks
XGBoost Extreme Gradient Boosting
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
2 
--- PAGE 3 ---
efficiency of FPSCs was improved by 31.64 % when Al
2
O
3 
nanofluid was 
applied at a volume concentration of 1.5 %. The thermal efficiency of 
FPSCs was increased by 5 % by a hybrid nanofluid that contained silver, 
graphite, and carbon nanotubes, as discovered by Otanicar and Golden. 
These findings emphasize nanotechnology’s ability to supplant the 
limitations of traditional TESs and improve their overall efficiency [ 12 ].
Energy efficiency is one of the critical aspects that define the design 
and operation of TESs. Organized energy systems reduce the amount of 
energy used and minimize environmental impacts through the reduction 
of greenhouse gas emissions [ 13 ]. Improving the effectiveness of TESs is 
an important task to increase the energy output and minimize energy 
losses. Optimization is critical in renewable energy because the sources 
are inherently stochastic and random, such as solar and wind [ 14 ]. 
Numerous optimization strategies have been devised to improve overall 
system performance, including both passive and active approaches. 
Passive techniques, including optimizing design and materials in energy 
systems, do not need external energy input [ 15 ]. Conversely, active 
solutions use external forces, such as pumps or fans, to enhance heat 
transmission. One of the most promising optimization strategies is 
nanotechnology, which has shown the ability to raise the thermal con -
ductivity of working fluids and improve heat transfer efficiency [ 16 ].
Nanotechnology has transformed TESs by facilitating the creation of 
materials with enhanced thermal characteristics. Nanofluids have been 
thoroughly investigated for their capacity to enhance heat transfer rates 
in thermal systems [ 17 ]. The increased thermal conductivity of nano -
particles facilitates enhanced heat absorption and transmission, result -
ing in improved thermal efficiency. Moreover, the application of 
nanofluids has demonstrated improved stability in thermal systems by 
reducing sedimentation and enhancing the long-term performance of 
heat exchangers [ 18 ]. In addition to advancements in nanotechnology, 
AI is emerging as a powerful tool for optimizing the performance of TESs 
[ 19 ].
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and Particle Swarm Optimisation 
(PSO) have been applied for the emulation and prediction of the per -
formance of energy systems under various operational conditions. Such 
approaches help build more accurate and robust energy systems with the 
help of processed data and predictive algorithms [ 20 ]. The application 
of materials on the nanoscale to improve the attributes of such materials 
is what is known as nanotechnology. Applications of TESs that make use 
of nanofluids and other nanomaterials have been extensively docu -
mented in the scientific literature as a result of their utilization of 
nanotechnology. Increasing the thermal conductivity of working fluids 
and the heat transfer coefficient has been accomplished by the use of 
nanofluids, which are a mixture of nanoparticles and base fluids [ 21 ]. 
This makes them ideal candidates for improving the performance of the 
solar thermal systems, and other heat exchange systems. A detailed 
analysis of the applicability of nanofluids in solar water heaters and 
FPSCs has been made. Scientists have demonstrated that by adding 
nanoparticles, like Al
2
O
3
, CuO, and TiO
2
, into the standard working 
fluids, heat transfer coefficients and system performance may improve. 
Yousefi et al. [ 22 ] found that the thermal efficiency was increased by 28 
% with Al
2
O
3 
nanofluid in FPSCs, and 35 % using MWCNT nanofluids. 
As seen from these results, nanotechnology holds great promise for 
improving and optimally utilizing TESs. On the other hand, AI has been 
increasingly utilised in the process of optimizing TESs [ 23 ].
Modelling, simulating, and forecasting the performance of energy 
systems have all been accomplished through the utilization of AI ap -
proaches. These methodologies include ANNs, PSO, and Adaptive 
Neuro-Fuzzy Inference Systems (ANFIS). Through the examination of 
huge datasets and the recognition of patterns that would be difficult to 
discover using conventional methods, these approaches offer a strategy 
that is both more exact and effective in terms of improving system 
performance. Kalani et al. [ 24 ] presented a model for evaluating the 
efficiency of a PV/T solar collector utilizing ZnO/water nanofluid 
through ANNs and particle swarm optimization. Applying 130 experi -
mental data sets, they showed that both ANFIS and Radial Basis 
Function (RBF) methods provide the highest performance for predicting 
the outlet temperature as well as the total system efficiency. Al-Waeli 
et al. [ 25 ] similarly evaluated the performance of PV/T systems using 
NePCM and nanofluid, indicating that AI-based models yielded 
dependable estimations of system efficiency. Fig. 1 shows an overview of 
the workflow of thermal energy storage systems in combination with AI 
techniques.
Unlike earlier models of AI, wherein an apparent assistive role was 
done to energy systems, AI has come of age since it has graduated to 
becoming the main driver of smart control, forecasting, and strategy 
optimization. Hot applications have emerged in building and industrial 
thermal regulation, where Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 
(HVAC) systems represent a considerable fraction of energy consump -
tion. The application of real-time thermal load forecasting, fault detec -
tion, and dynamic energy management has made much use of AI 
algorithms, especially ML, ANNs, and ANFIS [ 26 ].
One such application is where predictive maintenance strategies 
have been devised with AI in-built techniques so that faults are detected 
before the eventual failure of systems. This strategy will minimize the 
associated costs of maintenance and the idle times of operation. Intel -
ligent control systems automatically recalibrate the HVAC functions by 
accessibility modes, weather forecasts, and indoor conditions, for 
example, setting thermal comfort at energy-minimizing levels. These 
forms now establish a new profile of TES’ effectiveness in smart 
buildings.
A recent article published by Ukoba et al. (2024) [ 26 ] shows how, in 
hybrid AI models where Deep Learning (DL) techniques are coupled 
with other fault classification algorithms, these models could signifi -
cantly enhance system reliability and decrease energy usage by proac -
tive diagnostics. Their work is an example of increasingly shaping the 
synergy of AI techniques with actual physical system modelling to 
connect data-driven intelligence with pragmatic energy engineering.
The success of AI in building environments creates a possibility of 
greater generalizability across other TESs, such as solar collectors, en -
ergy storage devices, heat exchangers, and so on. Induction of AI’s ca -
pabilities in pattern-recognition, performance-prediction, and 
autonomy from control could leverage these systems even further when 
combined with the modern advanced materials or nanofluids and Nano- 
enhanced Phase Change Materials (NePCMs). Real-world implementa -
tions have substantiated this potential. For instance, AI-powered HVAC 
systems have achieved energy savings of up to 28 % through predictive 
control and fault detection mechanisms, with return-on-investment pe -
riods under three years [ 26 ]. Similarly, in photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) 
systems, hybrid AI models integrating deep learning with fault di -
agnostics have demonstrated improved reliability and reduced opera -
tional energy consumption [ 27 ]. These concrete outcomes highlight 
how AI is not merely theoretical but is actively transforming thermal 
energy systems through measurable gains in efficiency, cost savings, and 
operational resilience. Thus, AI integration in thermal sciences estab -
lishes a practical and data-driven path toward sustainable energy 
innovation.
1.1. Background and motivation
The escalating global energy demand, coupled with pressing envi -
ronmental concerns, has intensified the need for sustainable and effi -
cient TESs. Traditional fossil fuel-based systems are unsustainable, 
prompting a shift toward renewable energy integration. However, 
renewable sources like solar and wind suffer from intermittency, 
necessitating advanced solutions for energy storage and heat transfer 
optimization.
1.2. Current challenges and research gaps
Despite advancements, existing TESs face critical limitations: (1) low 
thermal conductivity of conventional PCMs, (2) inefficiencies in heat 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
3 
--- PAGE 4 ---
exchangers and solar collectors, and (3) a lack of real-time adaptive 
control. While nanotechnology (e.g., nanofluids, nano-enhanced PCMs) 
improves thermal properties, scalability and cost remain hurdles. 
Similarly, AI-driven predictive models show promise but are often siloed 
from material innovations.
1.3. Novelty and contribution of this work
This study bridges these gaps by synergizing nanotechnology and AI 
to create intelligent, self-optimizing thermal systems. Key innovations 
include: 
• Material Advancements: Nano-enhanced PCMs and hybrid nano -
fluids to boost heat transfer and storage capacity.
• AI Integration: Machine Learning (ML) for real-time performance 
prediction, adaptive control, and fault detection.
• System-Level Optimization: A unified framework combining nano -
material properties with AI-driven decision-making for dynamic 
energy management.
By integrating these domains, we demonstrate a transformative 
approach to enhance efficiency, reduce costs, and enable scalability, 
addressing a critical gap in the literature.
1.4. Methodology
This review adopts a narrative approach to synthesize the recent 
advancements in the application of nanotechnology and AI for opti -
mizing TESs. Although not a systematic review, we employed a struc -
tured process to ensure comprehensiveness and relevance.
Literature Sources:
Peer-reviewed articles were retrieved from major scientific databases 
including Scopus, Web of Science, ScienceDirect, IEEE Xplore, and 
SpringerLink. Only English-language publications were considered. The 
search strategy used Boolean combinations of terms such as: NePCM, 
thermal conductivity, latent heat, nanofluid, hybrid nanofluid, solar 
collector, heat exchanger, AI, ML, DL, TESs, HVAC, and energy 
optimization.
Inclusion Criteria: 
• Studies published between 2013 and 2024.
• Focused on thermal energy storage, solar thermal systems, nano -
materials in PCMs, or AI-based modelling/control in energy systems.
• Empirical studies with quantitative results or review papers 
providing comparative analysis.
Exclusion Criteria: 
• Articles lacking technical detail or experimental validation.
• Non-peer-reviewed reports, patents, or conference abstracts with 
insufficient data.
This process resulted in the selection of approximately 180 core 
publications, which were further analysed and categorized based on 
thematic relevance and technical contribution.
2. Fundamentals of thermal energy systems
The principles of TESs concentrate on techniques for storing and 
transporting energy as heat. These systems are classified into active and 
passive configurations. Active systems often use mechanical elements 
such as pumps and fans to control heat transmission, while passive 
systems depend on natural convection or conduction without additional 
energy sources. Both methodologies seek to minimize energy use, 
improve efficiency, and mitigate environmental effects. The use of 
nanotechnology and sophisticated materials has become crucial in 
improving the performance of TESs [ 28 ].
The related methodology incorporates a detailed exploration of ap -
proaches for coupling nanoscale phenomena, such as Brownian motion 
and quantum effects, with system-level AI architectures. This integra -
tion is paramount for developing predictive models that accurately 
reflect the complex interplay between microscopic behaviours and 
macroscopic system performance in thermal energy applications. The 
techniques for multiscale modelling have been delineate, where mo -
lecular dynamics simulations or direct numerical simulations of nano -
scale fluid dynamics, incorporating phenomena like Brownian motion 
and inter-nanoparticle forces, generate data. This data then serves as 
input for training AI models, including neural networks and Reinforce -
ment Learning (RL) algorithms, which operate at the system level. These 
AI architectures learn to extrapolate nanoscale behaviours to predict 
overall system efficiency, heat transfer rates, and long-term stability. 
Furthermore, the development of hybrid AI models that directly embed 
physical laws governing nanoscale phenomena, thereby enhancing the 
Fig. 1. Combination of the AI techniques with the thermal energy storage systems.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
4 
--- PAGE 5 ---
interpretability and robustness of system-level predictions has been 
discussed. This approach allows for a more nuanced understanding of 
how alterations at the atomic or molecular scale translate into measur -
able improvements or challenges in large-scale TESs.
2.1. Fundamentals of thermal energy systems
2.1.1. Active thermal energy systems
Active TESs use mechanical or electrical components to improve heat 
storage, transport, and usage. In contrast to passive systems that depend 
on natural heat transfer, active systems use pumps, fans, compressors, 
and other gear to control the movement of thermal energy more effec -
tively [ 29 ]. A vital element of active TESs is the heat exchanger, which 
enables the transfer of heat between two or more fluids at varying 
temperatures. Heat exchangers are often used in HVAC systems and 
solar water heaters to absorb, store, and transfer thermal energy [ 29 ]. In 
solar thermal systems, heat exchangers convey the heat captured by 
solar collectors to a fluid, usually water or a glycol mixture, which may 
subsequently be stored or used for heating buildings or water. The ef -
ficacy of this process depends on the heat exchanger’s design, the fluid’s 
characteristics, and the operating parameters. Nanofluids, fluids con -
taining suspended nanoparticles, are used in several systems to augment 
thermal conductivity and heat transfer rates, increasing overall perfor -
mance [ 30 ].
A crucial component of active TESs is thermal storage technology, 
which accumulates surplus thermal energy during periods of demand 
surpassing supply. There are three primary mechanisms employed in 
these systems: sensible heat storage, latent heat storage, and thermo -
chemical energy storage [ 31 ]. Latent heat storage, often using PCMs, has 
become prominent owing to its elevated energy storage density and 
isothermal properties. In active systems, thermal energy storage may 
stabilize the energy supply in renewable systems characterized by 
fluctuating energy input. In concentrated solar power plants, surplus 
solar energy may be retained during peak sunshine hours and then 
released during times of less sunlight, providing a continuous energy 
supply [ 32 ]. The regulatory mechanisms of active TESs are essential for 
enhancing their efficiency. Advanced control algorithms, often inte -
grating AI and ML methodologies, may oversee, forecast, and modify 
system parameters in real-time to attain optimal efficiency.
AI-driven systems may forecast future energy demand and appro -
priately modify heating or cooling rates, thus minimizing energy waste. 
These intelligent controls are especially advantageous in systems influ -
enced by external variables, such as meteorological conditions or 
building occupancy, that impact thermal demand. Predictive mainte -
nance is a burgeoning use of AI in active systems, allowing operators to 
foresee faults and enhance maintenance plans, augmenting system 
dependability and durability [ 33 ]. A difficulty with active TESs is the 
energy required to operate mechanical components, which can offset the 
energy savings achieved through enhanced thermal management. Ad -
vancements in energy-efficient components and the incorporation of 
renewable energy are contributing to a reduction in the operating en -
ergy costs of these systems [ 34 ]. Solar Photovoltaic Panels (PV) may 
energize the mechanical components of solar thermal systems, 
enhancing the overall sustainability of the configuration. Furthermore, 
advancements in materials, including nano-enhanced PCMs, are 
consistently enhancing the energy storage capacity and thermal con -
ductivity of these systems, thereby increasing their efficiency and cost- 
effectiveness [ 35 ].
2.1.2. Passive thermal energy systems
Passive TESs are designed to regulate heat fluxes in buildings and 
other structures without mechanical components, using the inherent 
principles of heat transmission. They use the intrinsic characteristics of 
materials and ambient variables to achieve effective thermal control. In 
structures, passive thermal techniques diminish heating and cooling 
requirements by systematically absorbing and releasing heat. These 
systems optimize energy use and decrease dependence on active thermal 
systems, including HVAC systems, enhancing environmental sustain -
ability [ 36 ]. Thermal mass is a critical element of passive TESs, as it 
refers to a material’s capacity to absorb, store, and discharge heat over 
time. Significant thermal mass is possessed by materials such as con -
crete, brick, or stone, which allows them to absorb heat during the day 
and progressively release it at night. This helps to regulate indoor 
temperatures by reducing volatility and improving comfort, while 
simultaneously reducing the need for active heating or cooling systems.
Thermal mass is often integrated with deliberate architectural 
design, including the orientation of buildings to optimize or reduce sun 
exposure according to the season [ 37 ]. Insulation is a crucial element of 
passive thermal systems. Insulation regulates heat transfer between a 
building’s interior and outside, stabilizing inside temperatures. Well- 
insulated structures may save winter heat and maintain lower summer 
temperatures, reducing the need for active thermal regulation systems 
[ 38 ]. Insulation in walls, roofs, and floors often employs materials with 
low heat conductivity, like foam, fiberglass, or cellulose. Effective 
insulation boosts energy efficiency and improves occupant comfort by 
establishing a more stable temperature environment [ 39 ]. Besides 
thermal mass and insulation, passive systems use solar gain and natural 
ventilation to control internal temperatures. Solar gain denotes the ab -
sorption of sunlight to heat a structure. In colder areas, structures are 
often constructed with expansive south-facing windows that let sunshine 
penetrate during winter, heating the inside. Shading devices, such as 
overhangs or blinds, help mitigate warming in summer by obstructing 
excessive sunlight.
Passive thermal systems may optimize solar gain by using natural 
energy sources for heating, hence reducing reliance on artificial systems 
[ 40 ]. Natural ventilation is a vital component of passive TESs, using 
airflows to control temperature and air quality without mechanical 
intervention. Well-engineered ventilation systems facilitate the ingress 
of cold air into a structure while evacuating heated air, reducing the 
need for air conditioning [ 41 ]. Cross-ventilation, which utilizes aper -
tures on opposing sides of a structure to promote circulation, and stack 
ventilation, which leverages variations in air pressure to facilitate fresh 
air, are often used to improve thermal comfort. These strategies are 
particularly effective in temperate settings characterized by moderate 
outdoor temperatures [ 42 ]. Integrating thermal mass, insulation, solar 
gain, and ventilation may enhance a building’s energy efficiency via 
passive TESs. The effectiveness of these systems relies on meticulous 
design and consideration of local environmental factors. In some in -
stances, further techniques may be required to enhance energy effi -
ciency, such as using high-performance glass or integrating shading 
components. Although straightforward, passive systems sometimes need 
meticulous design and exact engineering to guarantee their successful 
operation across all environmental conditions [ 37 ].
2.2. Key performance indicators for optimization
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) are crucial for assessing and 
enhancing TESs. These metrics provide a systematic method to evaluate 
system performance, enabling efficiency, sustainability, and cost- 
effectiveness enhancements. In TES, KPIs are often classified into ther -
mal efficiency, energy storage capacity, reaction time, economic feasi -
bility, and environmental effect, enabling engineers and designers to 
pinpoint areas for improvement and evaluate various solutions. By 
comprehending and enhancing these KPIs, thermal systems may be 
refined for diverse applications, including building heating, cooling, and 
industrial activities [ 43 ]. Table 1 presents the selected KPIs for nano -
technology and AI in enhancing TES.
Thermal efficiency is a critical KPI, reflecting the system’s capacity to 
transform and use heat energy efficiently. High thermal efficiency in -
dicates that greater input energy is transformed into beneficial heat or 
cooling, minimizing waste and enhancing the system’s total energy 
performance [ 44 ]. Thermal efficiency may be quantified using 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
5 
--- PAGE 6 ---
characteristics like heat transfer rates, temperature differentials, and 
environmental heat loss. Enhancing thermal efficiency necessitates 
optimizing heat exchanger designs, selecting suitable materials with 
elevated thermal conductivity, and implementing techniques to reduce 
thermal losses during operation [ 45 ]. Energy storage capacity is a KPI, 
particularly for thermal energy storage systems. This statistic assesses 
the system’s capacity to retain thermal energy for subsequent use, which 
is crucial for scenarios with variable energy demand. Systems that 
include solar thermal energy depend on effective energy storage to 
provide heat during times devoid of sunshine [ 46 ].
The energy storage capacity is determined by the characteristics of 
the materials used in the system, including their heat capacity, phase 
change temperature, and energy density. Improving energy storage ca -
pacity may provide superior load control and increased resilience 
against supply disruptions [ 47 ]. The response time, or the system’s ca -
pacity to adapt to fluctuations in energy demand, is another critical KPI. 
In several applications, especially in dynamic situations such as build -
ings or industrial settings, the TES must promptly react to variations in 
temperature or energy demands. A reduced reaction time signifies that 
the system may swiftly modify its heat output, enhancing overall effi -
ciency and user comfort [ 48 ]. Response time is influenced by the sys -
tem’s thermal inertia, the velocity of heat transfer mechanisms, and the 
management techniques used to manage energy flow. Advanced control 
algorithms and intelligent sensors may enhance reaction times, guar -
anteeing that the TES adjusts rapidly to real-time fluctuations [ 49 ].
Economic viability is another KPI, integrating early investment ex -
penditures with long-term operations costs. This statistic assesses the 
financial viability of a TES by juxtaposing installation expenses, main -
tenance obligations, and energy savings during the system’s lifespan. 
For TES to achieve widespread adoption, particularly in commercial and 
residential structures, it must provide a cost-effective alternative to 
conventional heating and cooling systems [ 50 ]. Economic feasibility 
may be enhanced using resilient, low-maintenance materials, engi -
neering systems that need little energy consumption, and incorporating 
renewable energy sources to mitigate operating expenses. Furthermore, 
lifetime cost analysis may provide an in-depth comprehension of various 
TES technologies’ financial advantages and compromises [ 51 ]. The 
environmental effect is becoming recognized as a critical KPI due to the 
intensifying worldwide emphasis on sustainability. TES is often inte -
grated into comprehensive programs to diminish carbon emissions, 
enhance energy efficiency, and shift toward renewable energy sources 
[ 52 ].
The environmental impact KPI evaluates aspects like greenhouse gas 
emissions, resource use, and the risk of pollution or ecological deterio -
ration. Systems using renewable energy sources or materials with little 
environmental impact often get superior ratings in this area. Enhancing 
TES for ecological effect entails using sustainable materials, reducing 
waste heat, and engineering systems compatible with renewable energy 
sources like solar or wind power [ 53 ]. Additional KPIs for material 
performance have been made available as a result of the incorporation of 
nanotechnology into TES. These KPIs include the thermal conductivity 
of nanofluids and the latent heat storage capacity of nano-enhanced 
PCMs. In order to increase the thermal transfer characteristics and en -
ergy storage efficiency of thermal energy storage, these cutting-edge 
materials have been developed. If successful, this might lead to signifi -
cant enhancements in performance [ 46 ]. PCMs that have been upgraded 
with nanotechnology have the potential to store more energy per unit 
volume than traditional materials. This would result in an increase in the 
energy density and compactness of thermal energy storage. The use of 
nanoparticles, on the other hand, raises new concerns, such as the 
requirement to guarantee the durability and stability of these materials 
over extended periods of operation. These concerns need to be overcome 
in order to totally improve the performance of the system [ 54 ].
In AI and ML, KPIs of system intelligence and adaptability are also 
developing. Intelligent thermal energy storage systems using AI algo -
rithms can forecast energy demand, optimize energy storage and dis -
tribution, and modify operating parameters in real-time [ 33 ]. These 
systems are assessed on their capacity to learn from previous data, 
predict future energy requirements, and reduce energy waste via accu -
rate control. KPIs in this arena include predictive accuracy, energy 
savings realized via AI optimization, and system flexibility in fluctuating 
situations. As AI progresses, these KPIs will gain significance for 
enhancing the next generation of TES [ 55 ].
2.3. Challenges in current thermal energy systems
Contemporary TES have several hurdles that impede their extensive 
implementation and effective functionality. These difficulties include 
technological, economic, and environmental dimensions, making con -
fronting them for future progress essential. Critical challenges include 
augmenting energy storage efficiency, minimizing heat losses, opti -
mizing system integration, and addressing constraints in thermal energy 
materials. Moreover, guaranteeing cost-effectiveness, scalability, and 
environmental sustainability is essential for TES to emerge as a viable 
alternative to traditional energy systems [ 50 ]. A primary technological 
difficulty is improving the energy storage efficiency of TES. Contem -
porary systems, especially those using PCMs, face challenges in effi -
ciently storing and releasing thermal energy. Numerous materials have 
limited thermal conductivity, resulting in diminished heat transfer rates 
and decreased efficiency [ 55 ]. PCMs may absorb significant heat during 
phase transitions, yet their gradual energy release constrains their use in 
real-time scenarios. Researchers are investigating innovative materials 
such as nano-enhanced PCMs, which use nanoparticles to boost heat 
conductivity. Nonetheless, maintaining the stability and cost-efficiency 
of these materials for prolonged usage is a considerable difficulty [ 46 ].
2.3.1. Heat losses
A significant concern is thermal energy dissipation during storage 
and transfer operations. Heat loss transpires inherently owing to the 
temperature differential between the thermal energy storage and its 
environment, resulting in diminished system efficiency [ 56 ]. This may 
alleviate this issue; nevertheless, alternatives sometimes compromise 
efficacy and expense. The creation of cost-effective and eco-friendly 
Table 1 
KPIs for Nanotechnology and AI in Enhancing TESs.
Category KPI Description
Efficiency
Thermal efficiency
The ratio of useful thermal energy output 
to total thermal energy input.
Energetic efficiency
The ratio of useful exergy output to total 
exergy input.
Heat transfer 
enhancement
Improvement in heat transfer rate 
compared to conventional methods.
Temperature 
uniformity
Consistency of temperature distribution 
within the system.
Heat loss reduction
Minimization of heat loss to the 
environment.
Cost- 
Effectiveness
Initial investment
Cost of implementing nanotechnology 
and AI solutions.
Operational costs
Energy consumption, maintenance, and 
repair expenses.
Return on 
investment (ROI)
Economic benefits are realized compared 
to the initial investment.
Payback period
Time is required to recoup the initial 
investment.
Life cycle cost 
analysis
Total cost of ownership over the system’s 
lifetime.
Sustainability
Environmental 
impact
Reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, 
water consumption, and waste 
generation.
Resource utilization Efficient use of materials and energy.
Reliability System uptime and operational stability.
Durability Longevity and lifespan of the system.
Social impact
Benefits to communities and society 
include job creation and improved quality 
of life.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
6 
--- PAGE 7 ---
high-performance insulation is an urgent issue. Furthermore, preserving 
the thermal insulating characteristics of these materials over time, 
particularly under changing climatic circumstances, presents further 
hurdles. This is especially important for extensive thermal energy stor -
age applications because minor inefficiencies might result in consider -
able energy losses [ 28 ].
2.3.2. System integration
Integrating with the current energy infrastructure is another signif -
icant hurdle for thermal energy storage. Although these systems provide 
viable energy storage and load-balancing alternatives, particularly 
renewable energy sources such as solar and wind, their integration into 
existing energy grids is intricate. Thermal energy storage systems must 
be able to store surplus energy when production surpasses demand and 
discharge it when demand is high [ 57 ]. Nevertheless, existing energy 
networks are not consistently designed to meet the particular re -
quirements of thermal energy storage, including diverse demand pat -
terns and variable temperatures. Furthermore, the control systems 
necessary for managing thermal energy storage integration sometimes 
lack the sophistication required for real-time modifications, particularly 
in dynamic situations like metropolitan regions or industrial settings. 
Smart grid technologies and sophisticated control algorithms are 
essential to address this difficulty; nevertheless, their deployment re -
mains nascent [ 58 ].
2.3.3. Materials limitations
The materials used in thermal energy storage also pose considerable 
hurdles. Numerous materials demonstrating favourable thermal quali -
ties, such as high heat capacity or phase transition capabilities, are 
either costly or possess restricted availability. This raises apprehensions 
over the economic feasibility of extensive thermal energy storage 
deployment, especially in cost-sensitive sectors such as construction and 
manufacturing [ 59 ]. Furthermore, some materials used in thermal en -
ergy storage, like synthetic PCMs or certain thermal insulation types, 
may exert detrimental environmental effects during their manufacturing 
processes or upon disposal at the conclusion of their life cycle. Pursuing 
sustainable, eco-friendly alternatives that maintain performance is a 
continuous scientific endeavour [ 60 ].
2.3.4. Economic challenges
Economic challenges are a significant impediment to the extensive 
use of thermal energy storage. The initial expenses related to installing 
and integrating these systems might be excessive, especially for smaller 
enterprises or household uses. Although thermal energy storage may 
result in substantial long-term energy savings, the requisite upfront 
expenditure often deters implementation [ 51 ]. Moreover, the payback 
time for thermal energy storage might be protracted, particularly in 
areas with low energy prices or minimal renewable energy subsidies. 
This hinders thermal energy storage’s ability to compete with conven -
tional energy storage or heating and cooling systems. Minimizing the 
expenses of critical components, including innovative materials and 
control systems, is crucial for enhancing the economic feasibility of 
thermal energy storage [ 50 ].
2.3.5. Environmental sustainability
Environmental sustainability is a serious issue in the development 
and application of thermal energy storage systems. These systems 
potentially offer reduced greenhouse gas emissions by promoting energy 
conservation and the use of renewable energy sources; however, their 
ultimate environmental impact is immensely affected by the properties 
of the materials employed and the assessment of their complete life 
cycle-from raw material extractions to syntheses, operational uses, and 
end-of-life disposal [ 52 ].
From this perspective, Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) acts as an 
essential tool for assessing the environmental impacts of nanomaterials 
in thermal systems. Lacking such an assessment, claims of sustainability 
may prove to be incomplete or misleading. There have been many 
studies suggesting that even materials with very good thermal properties 
may generate high environmental costs through energy- and chemical- 
intensive manufacturing or due to problems on safe disposal and 
recyclability.
Toxicity of nanomaterials, especially carbon-based, and hybrid 
nanoparticles, remains poorly addressed in the literature. Such nano -
materials can potentially cause bioaccumulative or ecotoxic effects 
when released into the environment via leakage, degradation, or 
improper disposal. For instance, while multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs) are extensively thermally conductive, studies have shown 
that they could induce oxidative stress and inflammatory response in 
biological systems upon certain exposure scenarios. A completely clear 
long-term picture regarding the behaviour of these nanoparticles con -
cerning soil and water systems is still yet to be attained.
Thus, the development of nanofluids for TESs should not be based 
exclusively upon thermal performance indices such as effective heat 
transfer or improvement of the Nusselt number. Rather, a balanced 
approach integrating environmental risk assessment, regulatory oppor -
tunities, LCA study, and toxicity investigation should be applied to 
provide assurance that the proposed solutions are effective in operation 
and soundly sensitive environmentally [ 53 ].
To further substantiate the sustainability discussion of nanomaterials 
used in TESs, it is essential to consider quantitative metrics such as 
embodied energy, greenhouse gas emissions, and eco-toxicological ef -
fects [ 61 ]. For example, aluminium oxide (Al
2
O
3
) nanoparticles (widely 
used for enhancing thermal conductivity in NePCMs) have an estimated 
embodied energy ranging from 460 to 500 MJ/kg, with associated CO
2 
emissions of 25 to 30 kg CO
2
-equivalent per kg produced. In contrast, 
copper oxide (CuO) nanoparticles, while offering higher thermal con -
ductivity enhancement per unit mass, are associated with higher 
embodied energy (650–700 MJ/kg) and greater CO₂ emissions (35–40 
kg CO₂-eq/kg). These differences suggest that although CuO may deliver 
better thermal performance, its environmental manufacturing footprint 
is considerably larger than that of Al
2
O
3
, raising concerns over large- 
scale deployment, especially in applications where sustainability is a 
priority [ 62 ].
Toxicological studies also indicate marked differences in ecological 
impact. Al
2
O
3 
nanoparticles typically exhibit low aquatic toxicity, with 
effective concentration (EC50) values generally above 100 mg/L, sug -
gesting low risk to aquatic organisms. Conversely, CuO nanoparticles 
show moderate to high aquatic toxicity, with EC50 values often between 
1 and 10 mg/L and are known to induce oxidative stress and membrane 
damage in freshwater and marine biota. Furthermore, while Al
2
O
3 
demonstrates good recyclability through thermal sintering and struc -
tural recovery, CuO suffers from degradation and oxidation challenges 
that complicate end-of-life handling. These observations underline the 
need for sustainability-aware nanomaterial selection, particularly in 
systems requiring high thermal performance alongside low environ -
mental impact. Future research should emphasize green synthesis 
pathways, low-toxicity nanomaterials, and lifecycle-oriented design to 
minimize long-term ecological and human health risks [ 62 ].
3. Introduction to nanotechnology
Nanotechnology, derived from the Latin word nanus, meaning 
dwarf, is defined as the science and engineering dedicated to the design, 
synthesis, characterization, and application of materials and devices 
with at least one dimension on the nanometer scale (approximately 
1–100 nm) or one billionth of a metre (10–9) [ 63 ]. Nanotechnology is 
recognized as one of the twenty-first century’s most innovative and 
cutting-edge technologies. It is an area of research constantly growing 
and contributes to practically every branch of science, including infor -
mation and communications technology, medicine, materials science, 
agriculture, and the natural sciences and engineering. Researchers are 
particularly interested in these materials because their decreased size 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
7 
--- PAGE 8 ---
may significantly affect their physico-chemical properties [ 64 ]. 
Numerous researchers have examined how adding nanoparticles affects 
the performance of composites made of polymers and fibres in ballistic 
applications, with encouraging findings [ 65 , 66 ]. Nanotechnology has 
made significant advances in water purification [ 67 ], agriculture [ 68 ], 
energy [ 69 ], transportation [ 70 ], electronics [ 71 ], healthcare [ 72 ], and 
environmental bioremediation [ 73 ]. Preclinical research has demon -
strated the effectiveness of nanotechnology-based tools against various 
illnesses [ 74 – 76 ]. It has already demonstrated its value through its 
diagnostic, vaccine, and therapeutic applications, which have since 
expanded into clinical applications.
The treatment of COVID-19 has garnered significant interest due to 
the unique characteristics of nanoparticles [ 77 , 78 ]. Nanotechnology is 
becoming increasingly popular in the oil and gas [ 79 ]. The application 
of nanotechnology in the field of computer systems holds significant 
potential for enhancing the functionality and components of computers. 
Computing devices, on the other hand, have the potential to imitate and 
advance the development of nanotechnology [ 80 , 81 ]. New surface fin -
ishing and production processes are now being considered by re -
searchers as a potential means of using nanotechnology to develop 
applications that are both novel and intelligent [ 82 ]. The packaging of 
food, which was traditionally passive or conventional, is currently 
transitioning toward active or creative packaging that makes use of 
nanotechnology to develop food packaging that is adaptive, dynamic, 
and intelligent, with increased functionality [ 83 , 84 ]. Before imple -
menting nanotechnology into everyday life, it is necessary to take into 
consideration a number of potential concerns, despite the fact that it 
offers a multitude of benefits. Nanoparticles are very different from their 
bulk counterparts in terms of the characteristics that they show. As a 
result of decreased size and increased surface area per unit volume, 
migration of nanomaterials into food from packaging, and exposure of 
consumers to nanoparticles, there is a possibility that potentially 
harmful effects might occur on human health [ 85 , 86 ].
3.1. Nanomaterials and their properties
Any substance with at least one dimension inside the nanoscale range 
(generally between 1 and 100 nm) is called a “ nanomaterial ” . Examples 
of the various structures classified as nanomaterials include thin films, 
nanoparticles, nanofibers, and nanotubes. Nanomaterials ’ huge surface 
area and compact size make them attractive because they increase the 
ratio of surface atoms to inner atoms. As a result, the surface chemistries 
of bigger materials that are reduced to nanoscale dimensions become 
more prominent and alter their physical characteristics [ 87 ]. Metals, 
polymers, natural chemicals, and nanostructured materials are the four 
primary categories into which nanomaterials can be classified [ 88 ]. 
Copper [ 89 ], Gold [ 90 ], palladium [ 91 ], selenium [ 92 ] and are exam -
ples of metals, which are typically mineral nanoparticles.
Six conventional methods are primarily used to produce 
nanomaterials: 
a) A solid is broken up into nanocrystallites by a process known as ball 
milling [ 93 ]. This process involves letting very small balls that circle 
a drum to fall on the drum due to the force of gravity. By utilizing this 
method, it is possible to generate fines as well as dispersions of ho -
mogeneous oxide particles.
b) Sol-gel synthesis [ 94 ]: The technique of creating networks by first 
creating a colloidal suspension (sol) and then gelating the sol to 
create a network in a continuous liquid phase (gel) is known as sol- 
gel synthesis. The ions of a metal or metalloid element encircled by 
various reactive ligands create the colloids.
c) Electrodeposition [ 95 ]: Controlled application of one or more layers 
to a surface is known as electrodeposition. Particles are placed on the 
graphene sheet ’ s surface due to the electrodeposition process.
d) Plasma arcing [ 96 ]: Gas is converted to conduct electricity during 
plasma arcing, finally releasing its electrons and ionizing. Plasma is 
the term for the ionized gas that results. Carbon nanotubes can be 
formed using this technique. Among the forms of plasma discharge 
are vacuum arcs.
e) Chemical vapour deposition [ 97 ]: The process of chemical vapour 
deposition involves the creation of nanoparticulate particles from 
gas. After the material has been heated to the point where it becomes 
a gas, it can frequently settle as a solid on a surface while being 
vacuumed. It is possible to create a new product that is separate from 
the material that has been volatilised by either direct deposition or a 
chemical reaction.
f) Using natural nanoparticles [ 98 ]: To employ natural nanoparticles, 
their crystallite ties must be broken to be reconstructed into new 
materials. Batteries, motor vehicles, aircraft, medical implants, ma -
chine tools, insulating materials, and high-power magnets are all 
made with nanomaterials.
3.2. Nano-enhanced phase change materials
The storage of thermal energy is essential for the implementation of 
renewable energy on a large scale as well as the transition to deca -
rbonised buildings and transportation networks. Latent heat storage is 
included in the category of thermal energy storage. The most beneficial 
approach allows for the storage of solar thermal energy through the use 
of PCMs latent heat. Thermal energy storage, heat transfer rate, and 
thermal conductivity are all improved when nanoparticles are added to 
PCM. PCM has a variety of applications, including but not limited to: a) 
electrical devices; b) solar thermal systems [ 99 ], c) building thermal 
management; d) cold storage for food and medication; and e) photo -
voltaic thermal panels. As soon as the temperature of the surrounding 
environment drops below the phase transition temperature of the PCM, 
the thermal energy that has been absorbed is released into the envi -
ronment [ 100 ]. The term “ enthalpy of fusion ” refers to the thermal 
energy that is either absorbed or released during the phase transition of 
PCM from solid to liquid and liquid to solid modes [ 101 , 102 ]. During the 
phase transition, the PCM either takes in or gives off a significant 
quantity of heat, which is referred to as latent heat. This occurs without 
the PCM creating a change in temperature. The addition of a source term 
to the equation that represents the latent heat allows for this to be 
incorporated into the equation that describes heat conduction. 
∂ T
∂ t
= α
∂
2
T
∂ x
2
+
1
ρ c
p
∂ H
∂ t
(1) 
where c
p 
is the specific heat capacity, ρ is the material density, 
∂ H
∂ t 
is the 
rate of latent heat absorption or release.
The quantity of heat that PCM stores or releases during a phase 
transition can be explained as follows: 
Q = mL (2) 
In this equation, Q represents the amount of heat absorption or 
release, m represents the mass of the PCM, and L represents the latent 
heat of fusion or solidification.
The latent heat from phase change and the sensible heat from tem -
perature change must be considered when determining the total energy 
released or stored. The following is an expression for the total heat 
( Q
total
): 
Q
total
= mc
p
Δ T + mL (3) 
where Δ T is the change in temperature during the cooling or heating 
process or after phase change occurs.
PCM heat storage and transmission may be simulated using this 
mathematical statement, which provides a fundamental basis for the 
simulation. By solving these equations, it is possible to make predictions 
regarding the temperature distribution as well as the amount of thermal 
energy that the PCM stores or releases. This is a key step in the process of 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
8 
--- PAGE 9 ---
developing effective thermal management and energy storage systems. 
The categorisation of materials that undergo phase change is shown in 
Table 2 .
The addition of nanoparticles to PCMs offers comprehensive solu -
tions to the inherent limitations of conventional PCMs, such as low 
thermal conductivity and phase separation. This innovation has led to 
the development of NePCMs, which incorporate nanoparticles (ranging 
from simple 0D structures like Al ₂ O ₃ and CuO to complex 3D architec -
tures) into the PCM matrix. These nanoparticles significantly enhance 
thermal conductivity and heat transfer performance. For example, 0D 
nanoparticles, such as metal oxides, improve thermal diffusion, making 
NePCMs ideal for rapid thermal applications. The degree of enhance -
ment depends on particle characteristics including size, shape, concen -
tration, and dispersion stability. Throughout this study, the term NePCM 
will consistently refer to these nano-modified PCMs. 0D nanoparticles, 
such as quantum dots or nano-spheres, scatter electrons, and phonons to 
increase the thermal conductivity of PCMs. 0D-enhanced PCMs are 
perfect for rapid heat applications. Ultrafine nanometer-scale particles 
with diameters under 100 nm larger than atomic clusters are called 0D 
nanoparticles. Metal and its oxide nanoparticles, including ZnO, Cu, Fe, 
Ag, Al
2
O
3
, and TiO
2
.
The study by Rufuss DDW et al. [ 105 ] concentrated on creating 
NePCM by utilizing titania and copper oxide nanoparticles in paraffin. It 
was found that adding 3 % titania to the base PCM increased the value of 
k by 25 %, whereas adding copper oxide nanoparticles increased the 
value to 28.8 %. Praveen and Suresh [ 106 ] experimented by applying 
CuO nanoparticles in Neopentyl Glycol. Using PCM resulted in a sig -
nificant enhancement of Thermal conductivity by a factor of 4. One- 
dimensional nanoparticles include nanorods, nanotubes, and nano -
fibers, among other examples. One-dimensional materials include car -
bon nanotubes and additions of 1D metal compounds such as copper 
sulphide, zinc oxide, and molybdenum disulphide. Crystalline structure 
is responsible for the excellent performance of carbon fibres, which is 
measured in terms of the k value, which is around 1000 W/(m ⋅ K).
The research conducted by Li et al. [ 107 ] involved the formation of 
carbon nanofibers into flake graphite. This resulted in the creation of a 
hybrid structured nanomaterial that enhanced the thermal performance 
of PCM. Within the context of the formation of stable PCM composites, 
the findings demonstrate an increase in thermal conductivity, loading 
capacity, and overall thermal efficiency. In their research, Cao et al. 
[ 108 ] synthesised NePCM by functionalising Single-Walled Carbon 
Nanotubes (SWCNTs) and Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (MWCNTs) 
using hexadecyl acrylate that was used in the preparation process. At 
0.47 W/(mK) and 0.88 W/(mK), respectively, the thermal conductivity 
values of SWCNTs and MWCNTs were 134 % and 339 % higher than the 
basic PCM. This comparison was made using the basic PCM as a refer -
ence. The use of nanoparticles appears to have resulted in a significant 
enhancement in the thermal performance of the basic PCM. Examples of 
two-dimensional nanomaterials include graphene and its derivatives, 
MXene, molybdenum disulphide (MoS
2
), and hexagonal boron nitride 
(h-BN) [ 109 ]. By interacting with PCM molecules, graphene and its 
derivatives are able to obtain considerable gains in heat conductivity. 
This is because of the vast surface area that these molecules possess. 
Aslfattahi [ 110 ] and colleagues dispersed MXene with organic PCM 
(paraffin) in order to improve the thermo-physical properties of the 
compound.
The intermolecular interactions that take place between the atoms in 
the surface area of the MXene nanoparticles and the C
–
H bonds of the 
organic PCM are responsible for the enhancement of the light-to-heat 
energy conversion procedure. As part of their research, Guo et al. 
[ 111 ] investigated the thermal energy storage and heat dissipation ca -
pabilities of the PCM with fin metal foam hybrid assembly. When 
compared to the baseline scenario, the use of fin metal foams in the 
thermal energy storage unit resulted in an improvement in temperature 
uniformity, an increase in the transient temperature response, and a 
reduction in melting time that was 83.35 % shorter. It is possible to make 
nano-enhanced PCM by spreading nanoparticles throughout the matrix 
of the PCM. The NePCMs have garnered a lot of attention because to the 
fact that they have the potential to be utilised in a variety of fields. The 
thermo-physical characteristics of nano-enhanced PCM and PCM are 
clearly differentiated from one another as a result of the presence of 
nanoparticles. The incorporation of nanoparticles has the potential to 
influence the melting temperature of the PCMs in a substantial way. 
Both the PCM matrix and the nanoparticles interact with one another, 
which has an effect on this transition happening.
The addition of nanoparticles, particularly those with a high thermal 
conductivity, such as graphene or carbon nanotubes, results in a 
considerable increase in the thermal conductivity of PCMs. There are a 
number of factors that influence this enhancement, including the con -
centration, size, shape, and distribution of the nanoparticles that are 
included inside the PCM. The presence of nanoparticles has an effect on 
the density of PCMs, which is an essential factor in determining the 
volume consumption requirements of thermal energy storage devices. 
The results of the introduction of nanoparticles by a number of re -
searchers are shown in Table 3 , along with the qualities that are altered 
as a result. The findings of a number of experiments point to the like -
lihood that nanoparticles might significantly increase the performance 
of PCM. These advancements not only make PCMs more efficient in 
terms of controlling and storing thermal energy, but they also expand 
the spectrum of applications that they may be used for.
3.3. Stability issues: agglomeration, phase separation, and cycling 
durability
Despite the promising enhancements in thermal conductivity and 
heat transfer performance, NePCMs suffer from critical stability chal -
lenges, particularly nanoparticle agglomeration and phase separation. 
These issues compromise the uniformity of dispersion, reduce the 
effective surface area for heat transfer, and lead to irreversible deteri -
oration in thermal energy storage properties after multiple melting- 
solidification cycles [ 122 ].
Table 2 
Classification Scheme for PCMs.
Based on the Physical 
state
Organic Paraffin, Ester, Fatty Acids, Alkanes, 
Alcohols
Inorganic Salts, Metals, Metal Alloys
Based on the melting 
temperature of the 
material
Low 
temperature
phase change lower than room 
temperature. These are suitable for 
refrigeration and cold storage.
Medium 
temperature
Phase change temperature is between 
room temperature and 100 
◦
C. 
Electrical cooling and construction 
materials use PCMs.
High 
temperature
Applications necessitating high- 
temperature heat storage are made 
with phase change temperatures 
exceeding 100 
◦
C. Molten ions and 
metal alloys are two examples of high- 
temperature PCMs.
Based on the chemical 
composition of 
material
paraffin
Thermal energy storage often uses 
organic PCM. Hydrocarbon paraffins 
are mostly carbon and hydrogen. 
Octadecane and eicosane are paraffins 
[ 103 ].
easter
organic PCM is a hydrocarbon chain 
having a – COOH end. Saturated or 
unsaturated fatty acids have single or 
double bonds. Fatty acids are eco- 
friendly and biodegradable.
salt hydrates
Inorganic PCMs are salt-water 
mixtures. Calcium chloride 
hexahydrate, magnesium sulphate 
heptahydrate, and sodium sulphate 
decahydrate are common [ 104 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
9 
--- PAGE 10 ---
Nanoparticle agglomeration occurs due to van der Waals attractions 
and insufficient surface functionalization, resulting in clusters that act as 
thermal barriers. Phase separation, on the other hand, arises from den -
sity mismatches between the base PCM and embedded nanoparticles, 
especially under the influence of gravitational and thermal cycling 
forces. Both mechanisms deteriorate the homogeneity of the composite 
and negatively influence the latent heat capacity and melting point.
Several experimental investigations have highlighted this concern. 
For instance, researchers observed a 12 % reduction in latent heat ca -
pacity after 200 thermal cycles in paraffin-based NePCMs with CuO 
nanoparticles due to agglomeration. Similarly, different work reported 
phase separation-induced sedimentation in Al ₂ O ₃ -enhanced PCMs, 
leading to localized overheating and reduced heat storage efficiency 
[ 123 ]. To mitigate these effects, researchers have proposed: 
• Surface modification and functionalization of nanoparticles (e.g., 
with surfactants, silanes, or polymer coatings) to improve colloidal 
stability.
• Use of supporting matrices such as porous carbon, metal foams, or 
encapsulation shells to physically stabilize the nanoparticles within 
the PCM.
• Ultrasonic dispersion and high-shear mixing during preparation to 
ensure better distribution.
• Incorporation of thixotropic agents or stabilizers, which enhance the 
viscosity and reduce sedimentation.
In recent work, carbon-based nanostructures such as graphene oxide 
and CNTs have shown superior stability due to their high aspect ratio 
and strong interfacial bonding with the PCM matrix, sustaining perfor -
mance over more than 500 cycles without notable degradation [ 122 ].
Therefore, assessing the long-term cycling behaviour and imple -
menting stabilization strategies are essential prerequisites before 
NePCMs can be considered for commercial-scale deployment in thermal 
energy systems.
3.4. Nanofluids for enhanced heat transfer
It is possible to transform a fluid into a nano-fluid by incorporating 
nanoparticles into the mixture. Nanofluids are liquid suspensions of 
nanoparticles that are dilute and the diameters of at least one of the 
nanoparticles are smaller than 100 nm [ 122 ]. The components that 
make up nanofluids are a base fluid and a dispersion of very small 
particles. There are a variety of possible base fluids, including water, 
ethylene glycol, surfactant-based fluids, polymeric fluids, engine oil, and 
mixtures of two or more liquids, among others. Nanofluid research is an 
interdisciplinary field that draws from the fields of physics, chemistry, 
and engineering. It has garnered a significant amount of attention 
because it has the potential to be applied in a variety of different in -
dustries. Choi and Eastman [ 123 ] presented the idea of nanofluids and 
started conducting experiments with the incorporation of nanoparticles.
Research on viscosity, stability, and other features that are essential 
for practical applications has been added to the investigations that were 
initially focused on improving thermal conductivity. Nanoparticles are 
combined with base fluids to produce a wide variety of nanofluids. Some 
examples of these nanofluids are copper oxide (CuO), alumina (Al
2
O
3
), 
silver (Ag), zinc oxide (ZnO), titanium dioxide (TiO
2
), carbon nanotubes 
(CNT), iron oxide (Fe
2
O
3
), magnesium oxide (MgO), cerium oxide 
(CeO
2
), and metal nanoparticles (AU). Bio-fluids, ethylene glycol, water, 
and a variety of coolants and lubricants are examples of basic fluids that 
are commonly used. The most recent advancements in nanofluids and 
the mathematical modelling of these fluids play an important part in the 
field of nanotechnology and industrial applications. However, the poor 
thermal conductivity rate of ordinary base fluids, such as water, 
ethylene glycol, and oil, is the fundamental restriction. In today ’ s world, 
the cooling of electronic equipment is the most important industrial 
necessity due to the rapid advancement of technology [ 124 , 125 ]. The 
nanoscale solid particles are submerged into host fluids in order to 
circumvent these constraints. This process alters the thermophysical 
properties of the host fluids and significantly increases the rate at which 
heat is transferred [ 126 – 129 ].
Nanofluids find their uses in a wide variety of fields, including but 
not limited to the following: cooling of electronic devices, heat ex -
changers, nuclear reactor safety, hyperthermia, biomedicine, engine 
cooling, car thermal management, and many more [ 130 – 133 ]. A variety 
of mathematical models have been utilised by a number of writers in 
order to provide a description of heat transport in nanofluids. Out of all 
of these models, the ones that are utilised the most are the ones in which 
the concentration of the nanoparticles remains constant, and the 
incorporation of the nanoparticles into the base fluid results in an 
improvement in the nanoparticles ’ physical attributes [ 134 – 136 ]. In 
addition, there are other models that include thermal dispersion [ 137 ] 
and Brownian motion [ 138 ] that are based on the modification of the 
physical parameters. The thermal properties of base fluids have been 
investigated by Buongiorno [ 139 ], who has devised a mathematical 
nanofluid model that is more complex than the one previously used.
Brownian motion and thermophoresis are two of the most important 
mechanisms for the transport of particles in nanofluids because of their 
similarities. Nanoparticles in the fluid have a tendency to be uniform 
Table 3 
The effects of the properties of nanoparticles.
Properties PCM Nanoparticles Observation
Melting point
sodium acetate trihydrate 
(CH
3
COONa ⋅ 3H
2
O, SAT) [ 102 ]
copper The PCM melting temperature was reduced to 57.8 from 58.5 
◦
C.
SAT-acetamide [ 112 ] aluminium nitride
The 9 wt% addition of AlN nanoparticles reduced the composite melting temperature 
from 47.8 to 47.3 
◦
C
Thermal 
conductivity
Paraffin [ 113 ]
carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNT)
The thermal conductivity of PCM is enhanced by factors such as the particles ’ weight 
fraction, size, and form.
Paraffin [ 114 ]
titanium oxide 
(TiO
2
)
Up to a certain point, the heat conductivity gets better. However, the thermal 
conductivity falls when the temperature rises over this point, surpassing the PCM 
melting temperature.
Latent heat 
capacity
Paraffin [ 115 ] Al
2
O
3 
and Fe
2
O
3
In the resulting NePCM, the latent heat capacity gradually decreases. The main 
explanation could be a decrease in the PCM ’ s mass fraction.
polyethylene glycol (PEG 4000) [ 116 ] GNP there is a steady drop in latent heat
Thermal 
diffusivity
eutectic PCM of lauric acid and methyl 
palmitate [ 117 ]
GNP nanoparticles The results exhibited an improvement in thermal diffusivity.
RT50 PCM [ 118 ] graphene The results demonstrated the optimum 34 % increment in thermal diffusivity
eutectic (palmitic-paraffin) [ 119 ] titanium oxide a decrement in thermal diffusivity is observed
Density paraffin [ 120 ]
graphene 
nanoplatelets (GNP)
The experimental outcomes revealed a noticeable rise in the density of the NEPCM, 
from an initial value of 800 kg/m
3 
to a final value of 923 kg/m
3
Specific heat
eutectic solution, including lithium 
carbonate and potassium carbonate [ 121 ]
silica nanoparticles
a significant enhancement in the specific heat capacity of the resultant nanofluid was 
attained, with gains ranging from 19 % to 24 %
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
10 
--- PAGE 11 ---
when the Brownian motion force is applied. It is the temperature 
gradient in the base fluid that is the source of the thermophoresis force. 
As a result of the fact that the particle receives more momentum impacts 
from the fluid molecules on the hot side than that on the cold side, the 
particle has a tendency to move in a direction that is opposite to the 
temperature gradient (the particle moves from hot to cold). This occurs 
when the size of the particle is very fine (on the order of nanometres). In 
light of this, nanofluids possess mass transfer processes as a result of the 
Brownian motion and thermophoresis forces. Energy is carried by the 
nanoparticles that migrate, and they transfer that energy to the medium 
that surrounds them.
The flow of nanofluid was tested by the researchers under a variety of 
settings and with a variety of nanoparticles. With the help of Buon -
giorno ’ s and non-homogeneous models, Celli [ 140 ] investigated the free 
convection flow that occurred within a side-heated square cavity that 
was filled with a nanofluid. There is a presumption that the thermo -
physical parameters of the nanofluid are functions of the average vol -
ume fraction of nanoparticles that are spread within the cavity. In 
another study [ 141 ], Sheikholeslami and colleagues investigated the 
MHD natural convection of a Cu – water nanofluid that was contained 
within a square cavity that was heated from below and cooled from the 
side walls. It has been found that the rate of heat transfer experiences a 
drop with the Hartmann number, while it experiences an increase with 
the length of the heat source, the percentage of nanoparticle volume, 
and the Rayleigh number.
Zhang et al. [ 142 ] and Shahsavar et al. [ 143 ] conducted an experi -
mental investigation on the thermal conductivity of nanofluids by uti -
lizing a variety of base fluids. The researchers investigated the ways in 
which the concentration of the dispersant, along with other parameters 
including mass fraction, temperature, and standing time, altered the 
thermal conductivity of the CNT-nanofluid blend. Following their dis -
cussion, they made the observation that the temperature range for 
20 – 60 
◦
C is 0 – 7 %, and the volume percentage range is 0 – 7 %. It was 
observed that the thermal conductivity of the nanofluid increased as 
both the temperature and the volume % rose. Nanofluid has been the 
subject of extensive study that has been conducted to investigate its 
potential as an alternative coolant for electronic cooling systems. These 
studies have demonstrated that nanofluid has the ability to increase the 
efficiency of heat transmission in microchannel heat sinks [ 144 ].
The researchers Lau et al. [ 145 ] discovered that nanofluids that 
contained alumina particles had a maximum temperature reduction of 
7 
◦
C when compared to regular water. Sajid and Ali [ 146 ] present a 
review of the application of nanofluid in the cooling of a variety of 
thermal devices, which has been the subject of research by a large 
number of researchers and practitioners. Nanofluids are utilised by 
Olabi et al. [ 147 ] in order to improve heat transmission in a variety of 
heat exchanger configurations. We investigated the heat transport of the 
conjugate in a container that was filled. Table 4 presents the results of a 
number of recent investigations that were conducted on nanofluids 
contained within a variety of enclosures. In general, the findings of these 
experiments demonstrated that the incorporation of nanoparticles into 
conventional working fluids leads to a notable enhancement in the flow 
and heat transfer characteristics of the fluids.
To provide a more transparent comparison of the thermal perfor -
mance improvements achieved using various nanomaterials in PCMs 
and base fluids, Table 5 summarizes key findings from selected studies. 
The table includes data on thermal conductivity, specific heat, and latent 
heat capacity enhancements as a function of nanoparticle type, con -
centration, and PCM/base fluid. These results highlight the significant 
variability in thermal performance depending on nanoparticle selection 
and concentration, demonstrating the importance of material optimi -
zation for targeted thermal energy applications.
4. Artificial intelligence in thermal energy systems
This section provides an overview of AI in TESs.
4.1. Brief overview of AI in energy management
AI and ML are emerging energy concepts that can enhance system 
effectiveness by incorporating past and predicted futures [ 158 ]. The 
“ Fourth ” Industrial Revolution heavily relies on AI, which is expanding 
quickly and having a big impact on the world economy. AI is a multi -
disciplinary field that creates intelligent computer programs using data- 
driven methodologies and sophisticated algorithms [ 159 , 160 ]. Though 
AI has been used extensively in the energy industry recently, it has also 
been used in a number of other sectors, such as finance, healthcare, 
education, and homes. AI was first applied to basic research and 
experimental tasks like power system prediction, fault diagnosis, and 
optimization. However, AI hasn ’ t been used extensively in the energy 
industry because of gaps in data collection and processing power. AI also 
necessitates IT resources exclusive to computing centres, which have a 
big environmental impact and substantial energy consumption [ 161 ].
AI is applied in different aspects of energy. Energy usage modelling 
for buildings is one application of AI and ML [ 162 ]. The task of deter -
mining a building ’ s energy use is complicated because of several vari -
ables, including equipment, occupant behaviour, weather, and physical 
attributes. Energy usage has been modelled in research using techniques 
Table 4 
Recent studies of nanofluid inside various enclosures.
Author nanofluids configuration Observation
Dulami et al. 
[ 148 ]
Ag – MgO/ 
water hybrid 
nanofluid
porous corrugated 
enclosure
thermal transfer 
performance is greatly 
improved as the volume 
percentage of 
nanoparticles increases
Al -Srayyih 
et al. [ 149 ]
Cu – Al
2
O
3
/ 
water hybrid 
nanofluid
quarter-circle 
having a pair of 
oscillating elliptical 
obstacles
transfer of heat 
increases with 
nanoparticle addition
Parveen et al. 
[ 150 ]
Fe
3
O
4
/ water
Inclined wavy 
cavity
the increase in 
nanoparticle volume 
fraction increases the 
effective electrical 
conductivity.
Al -Amir et al. 
[ 151 ]
TiO
2
-water 
nanofluid
Z -Staggered cavity
Their findings 
demonstrated that 
increasing the 
nanoparticle volume 
fraction enhanced the 
heat transmission rate.
Rehman et al. 
[ 152 ]
Cu – Al
2
O
3
/ 
water
Inclined wavy 
cavity
The addition of 
nanoparticles influences 
the convective effect.
Vajjha et al. 
[ 153 ]
CuO/Ethylene 
glycol and 
water mixture
Automotive 
radiator flat tube
A 6-vol% CuO nanofluid 
composition exhibited 
an 89 % increase in heat 
transfer rate compared 
to the base fluid.
Faraz et al. 
[ 154 ]
Cu-water
hexagonal 
enclosure fitted 
with a square 
cavity
the Nusselt number 
increases with an 
increase in nanoparticle 
volume fraction
Rahimpour 
and 
Moraveji 
[ 155 ]
Fe
3
O
4
/ water C-shaped
nanoparticle volume 
fraction enhances the 
heat transfer rate
Qurrat Ul Ain 
et al. [ 156 ]
Fe
3
O
4
- 
MWCNT
Star-shaped
Percentage analysis 
indicates that hybrid 
nanofluids (Fe
3
O
4 
 
MWCNT) significantly 
improve thermal 
distribution compared 
to conventional fluids.
Hansda [ 157 ]
Fe
3
O
4
-Cu/ 
water hybrid
Wavy trapezoidal
Changes in the volume 
percentage of 
nanoparticles upgraded 
the heat transfer rate 
inside the enclosure.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
11 
--- PAGE 12 ---
like support vector machines, decision trees, and ANN. This field also 
uses genetic algorithm and ANN techniques to optimize thermal comfort 
control in HVAC systems and absorption chillers. In the chemical in -
dustry, AI and ML are promising for process control applications 
[ 163 , 164 ]. Secondly, utilizing AI and ML in renewable energy is 
becoming more common, especially in photovoltaic power generation. 
These techniques can predict important variables and assist designers in 
improving installation site setups by forecasting and optimizing power 
generation. This can lead to a significant improvement in power gen -
eration. A variety of techniques can be applied to forecast power gen -
eration, such as ANN, historical data, and weather prediction.
AI and ML techniques can also be used to model wind energy, 
another renewable energy source. Additionally, ML has the potential to 
control and supply renewable energy for electric car batteries. Re -
searchers are becoming interested in new AI and ML-based models, such 
as ANN and fuzzy logic models, which show bright futures, while 
physical and conventional static models are effective for long-term en -
ergy generation predictions [ 164 – 166 ]. AI and ML are also being 
applied to energy storage to use energy sources if they are unavailable 
effectively. The architecture, performance, and characteristics of Li-ion 
batteries have all been described using ML techniques, which have also 
been used to suggest new materials that could increase stored energy. A 
recent popular idea is the Internet of Things (IoT), which connects 
commonplace items like buildings, appliances, cars, and people to the 
Internet and networks. By maximizing the flow of electricity through the 
grid by lowering power drawn and raising the power supply, IoT systems 
seek to minimize energy consumption, expenses, and emissions 
[ 163 , 167 ].
Energy systems can monitor and manage energy production, con -
sumption, and storage while cutting costs and balancing supply and 
Table 5 
Comparative performance metrics of nanofluids and nano-enhanced PCMs from selected studies.
Study Nanoparticle Base Material Concentration (wt 
%)
Thermal Conductivity Enhancement 
(%)
Specific Heat Change 
(%)
Latent Heat Change 
(%)
Rufuss et al. [ 105 ] TiO ₂ Paraffin 3 25 – –
Praveen & Suresh 
[ 106 ]
CuO Neopentyl Glycol 2 400 – –
Cao et al. [ 108 ] MWCNT
Hexadecyl 
Acrylate
0.47 339 – ↓ 12
Zhang et al. [ 142 ] CNT Water 0.5 27 + 8 N/A
Shahsavar et al. [ 143 ] GNP PEG 4000 1 35   6 ↓ 10
Fig. 2. AI-optimized solar collector using nanofluid and PCM for improved cooling and efficiency. The schematic illustrates the integration of AI algorithms like 
predictive control with nanofluid flow channels and PCM modules.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
12 
--- PAGE 13 ---
demand. By imitating natural processes like swarm intelligence, genetic 
evolution, and animal cognition, AI-based metaheuristic optimization 
technique solve challenging energy management problems and are 
dependable and effective energy management systems [ 168 ]. The met -
aheuristic optimization technique use three different search types to find 
optimal solutions: global, local, and random [ 169 ]. To optimize the 
energy system, these algorithms examine enormous amounts of data, 
spot complex patterns, and make deft choices. Drawing inspiration from 
the various ways that metaheuristic optimization techniques contribute 
to the energy system, this study concentrates on the following methods: 
Genetic Algorithms (GA) [ 170 ], PSO [ 171 ], ant colony optimization 
(ACO), simulated annealing (SA), Cuckoo Search Algorithm (CSA), and a 
few more recent ones [ 168 ].
In Fig. 2 , a flat plate collector is mounted on top of a PCM module, 
which has channels to circulate the flow. These channels allow the heat 
that is transferred to the nanofluid that flows into them through the solar 
panel and PCM. AI and ML are used in the given system to identify the 
conditions under which it should work to be optimal. These are choosing 
the right diameter of pipes, changing the flow rate of nanofluids, and the 
contact with PCM. The main objectives include the prevention of high 
operating temperatures of the solar panel, maximizing heat extraction 
ability into the nanofluid, and having a minimal pressure drop 
throughout the circulation circle. This intelligent control enables better 
thermal management and improved system performance.
Fig. 3 reveals a detailed schematic workflow that demonstrates how 
the design and optimization of heat exchangers can be integrated with 
AI. The concept of the core of this framework is a hybrid AI approach 
using GA and ANNs, which provides a valuable mechanism of automatic 
and intelligent design exploration. The role of the GA in this system is 
that of the global optimizer that creates a multitude of possible design 
variants by controlling important parameters like tube diameter, fin 
spacing, the rates of fluid flow, and geometrical patterns. The trained 
ANN model is then used as a surrogate or meta-model to predict the 
thermal and hydraulic performance metrics, i.e. Nusselt number, pres -
sure drop, and overall heat transfer coefficient, using the input design 
characteristics of these design variants. Such hybrid GAANN system 
dramatically eliminates the requirement of computationally expensive 
simulations or experiments at every step. Rather, ANN model quickly 
approximates performance outcome, making it possible to converge 
within optimum designs more quickly.
4.2. AI algorithms and techniques
Finding applications for AI algorithms in the energy sector requires 
understanding this vital area of computer science. These involve various 
scientific concepts and technologies, with computer systems drawing 
conclusions based on human logic and intelligence. This section presents 
an overview of some of these algorithms and techniques.
4.2.1. Machine learning
Due to renewables and EVs, power grids are evolving into smart 
Energy and Electric Power Systems (EEPS), incorporating integrated 
Cyber-Physical-Social Systems (CPSS). These systems generate high- 
dimensional data resources, generating large volumes of data. AI and 
ML tools can efficiently handle the difficulties of this high-dimensional, 
nonlinear data, time-varying, and the impacts of external and internal 
multi-physical parameters in EEPS [ 172 ]. In 1959, Arthur [ 173 ] intro -
duced the concept of ML, which allows computers to learn without 
explicit programming. ML aims to identify patterns in data and use those 
patterns to forecast results. This allows computers to explore and 
discover huge volumes of data, which helps humans make decisions. The 
goal of ML is to find an objective function f that creates the best possible 
mapping between an input variable ( X ) and an output variable ( Y ), 
allowing for more precise output predictions and evaluations Y = f ( X )
[ 172 ]. Fig. 4 shows the various approaches of ML.
The kind of input data and its quality impact how well ML algorithms 
work. ML is more than just a set of techniques, algorithms, or prediction 
models; instead, several classifications exist in the literature. Effective 
ML strategies can be found by synthesizing the literature according to 
algorithm type and input data. The following are some of the techniques 
of ML [ 174 , 175 ]; RL, Supervised Learning (SL), Semi-Supervised 
Learning (SSL) and unsupervised learning.
4.2.1.1. Reinforcement learning. With roots in statistics, control theory, 
and psychology, RL technology became widely studied and used in the 
late 1980s and early 1990s in domains such as automatic control, ML, 
and AI. This significant ML technique has three varieties: non-supervised 
learning, RL, and SL. Using the reinforcement signal from the environ -
ment, RL is an online learning technology that evaluates an intelligent 
agent ’ s action quality without giving it instructions on how to generate 
the appropriate action. To learn and adjust to the environment ’ s 
appraisal value, the intelligent agent depends on experience because the 
external environment offers little information [ 176 ]. RL is a technique 
that maximizes a numerical reward signal by mapping situations to 
actions. It assumes that a computer system is given a set of rules and then 
observes the results by those rules. Dynamical systems theory, in 
particular optimal control of Markov decision processes, can be used to 
formalize RL problems [ 177 ].
4.2.1.2. Supervised learning. During training, SL techniques need 
labelled data and utilize pre-established patterns and examples. Because 
it uses labelled data and can map or estimate the results of a fresh 
Fig. 3. AI-Driven optimization workflow for heat exchanger design combining GA and ANNs. The diagram outlines the hybrid AI approach, where GA generate 
design variants, and ANNs predict thermal performance metrics like Nusselt number.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
13 
--- PAGE 14 ---
sample, this approach is more accurate than unsupervised learning. The 
time and specialized knowledge needed to label the data, which is a 
major challenge, are the drawbacks, though [ 177 – 179 ]. Regression 
problems are the main application for SL algorithms, including decision 
trees, Random Forests (RFs), logistic and linear regression, support 
vector machines, ANN, and other neural network algorithms [ 180 ].
4.2.1.3. Semi-supervised learning. A ML technique called SSL was 
developed to tackle the shortcomings of both supervised and unsuper -
vised learning. Large amounts of training data are necessary for SL, but 
unsupervised learning cannot reliably cluster unknown data and does 
not require any labelled data. Researchers suggest SSL, which can 
identify unknown or test data and gain knowledge from a limited 
quantity of training data, to solve these problems. When building a 
model, SSL uses a few labelled patterns as training data and the rest as 
test data. SSL is further separated into two categories: semi-supervised 
clustering and semi-supervised classification [ 181 ].
4.2.1.4. Unsupervised learning. Data points are frequently grouped or 
clustered using unsupervised learning algorithms, which analyse a 
dataset by looking at shared characteristics. Additionally, they sum -
marize and explain data features like hierarchical clustering, principal 
component analysis, and k-means clustering. Additionally, there is semi- 
unsupervised learning, in which only a small portion of the training 
dataset has labels [ 180 ]. Optimisation algorithms and principal 
component analysis are two examples of the many diverse paradigms 
and characteristics that are associated with AI algorithms. Through 
dimensionality reduction, the number of features that are taken into 
consideration is reduced. This is accomplished by concentrating on the 
characteristics that are responsible for the majority of the variance in the 
output variable. For the purpose of locating a workable solution for a 
function, optimisation algorithms, such as gradient descent, grey wolf 
optimiser, and GA, make use of stochastic and heuristic principles. Ex -
amples of ML domains include natural language processing, which an -
alyses and forecasts text and graph-based algorithms, and neural 
networks, which convert data into network graphs for analysis based on 
centrality and similarity. Both of these domains are associated with the 
field of ML [ 182 ].
4.2.2. Deep learning
DL, a subset of ML, reduces the need for manual feature extraction by 
modelling complex data patterns using multi-layered neural networks. 
This makes it useful for tasks like natural language processing, image 
and speech recognition, and gaming [ 183 ]. The Fourth Industrial Rev -
olution (Industry 4.0) focuses on automation and smart systems in 
various applications like cybersecurity, smart cities, business intelli -
gence, and smart healthcare, which are driven by technology. Due to its 
ability to reveal intricate architecture in high-dimensional data, DL has 
greatly enhanced performance in various applications, most notably 
security technologies. Due to their ability to learn from past data, DL 
techniques can be extremely important in developing intelligent data- 
driven systems. Through automation and experience-based learning, 
DL has the potential to transform the world and the way people live their 
daily lives. AI, ML, and data science with advanced analytics, especially 
in intelligent computing, are all impacted by DL technology. This con -
versation will examine DL ’ s role in AI and how it relates to these fields 
[ 184 , 185 ]. In power engineering applications, DL algorithms are mostly 
divided into three major classes according to theoretical considerations, 
discriminative deep ANN, probabilistic deep neural networks ANNs and 
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [ 186 ].
4.2.2.1. Discriminative deep ANN. Learnt using discriminative deep 
ANNs are highly nonlinear decision boundaries between different clas -
ses and regression regions of power system data. Online small signal 
stability evaluation, faulty line localisation, and the rectified linear unit 
ANN for real-time responsive reliability management are all part of this. 
The stack autoencoder was developed for the purpose of unsupervised 
pattern identification in the areas of fault diagnostics, PV power fore -
casting, and wind energy prediction. The sequential behaviour of the 
time-dependent power system data is represented by a supervised tem -
poral feature extractor called a long short-term memory ANN. By uti -
lizing convolutional and pooling operations to capture persistent 
patterns in power system measurements, convolutional neural networks 
accomplish spatiotemporal tasks in areas such as fault identification, 
transient stability analysis, and renewable energy forecasting.
4.2.2.2. Probabilistic deep neural networks ANNs. To determine which 
Fig. 4. Approaches of ML.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
14 
--- PAGE 15 ---
hidden variables best characterize the data ’ s probability density func -
tion, probabilistic deep neural networks ANNs employ feature learning. 
The popular probabilistic graphical model known as deep belief net -
works uses conditionally independent latent features to learn the 
probability density function of data. They are employed for probabilistic 
state estimation, load prediction, transient stability evaluation, and 
wind and solar power prediction. Generative Adversarial Networks 
(GANs) are models that compare their generated data samples with the 
real dataset to improve the accuracy of their learned probability density 
function. They are applied to model-free renewable scenario generation, 
smart grid cyber-attack detection, and outlier and fault detection issues. 
To determine the probability density function of data, variational 
autoencoders (VAEs), a new type of deep generative ANN, learn a high- 
dimensional latent variable that is mapped to the original data samples. 
Electric vehicle load generation, power grid synthesis, and unsupervised 
anomaly detection in energy time series are all applications for VAEs.
4.2.2.3. Deep reinforcement learning. DRL is an ML method that makes 
use of environmental feedback, calculated by a reward function, to learn 
the best course of action. In contrast, traditional DL uses continuous 
target functions for regression and discrete target functions for classifi -
cation. In contrast to traditional DL, DRL uses experience in an observ -
able environment to decline a general error function and solve general 
problems. Self-learning control for energy-efficient transportation, 
adaptive emergency control, and voltage control are just a few of the 
control issues for which it is frequently employed. DRL is also used to 
solve optimization problems, such as learning the most effective bidding 
techniques in electricity markets, creating demand response plans for 
energy management, and determining the optimal cooperative sched -
ules for wind and storage to lower uncertainty in renewable generation 
in smart grids. DRL has recently been introduced to power system data 
integrity defence, dynamic power allocation, and cyber-attack detection 
and recovery.
4.3. Classification of ML algorithms by subdomain
AI techniques vary in effectiveness depending on the specific sub -
domain of application within TESs. The following subsections provide a 
categorized overview:
4.3.1. Predictive modelling and performance forecasting
• Algorithms Used: ANNs, Support Vector Machines (SVM), RF, 
Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)
• Application Context: These algorithms are commonly used to predict 
system outputs such as outlet temperature, heat transfer rate, and 
collector efficiency based on input parameters like solar irradiance, 
ambient temperature, and flow rate.
• Comparative Effectiveness: XGBoost has shown superior perfor -
mance in terms of prediction accuracy and computational speed due 
to its gradient boosting architecture. ANNs are flexible and effective 
for nonlinear systems but may require longer training times and 
careful tuning to avoid overfitting.
4.3.2. Control and optimization
• Algorithms Used: RL, ANFIS, Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), GA
• Application Context: These techniques are employed for dynamic 
control of energy systems, such as regulating pump speeds, adjusting 
heat exchanger flows, or switching thermal loads to optimize effi -
ciency in real-time.
• Comparative Effectiveness: RL, particularly Deep Q-Networks 
(DQNs), have been applied for self-learning controllers capable of 
adapting to environmental changes without explicit programming. 
ANFIS blends the learning capability of neural networks with fuzzy 
logic reasoning. PSO and GA are suitable for multi-objective opti -
mization, though they are often more computationally intensive.
4.3.3. Fault detection and predictive maintenance
• Algorithms Used: Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks, 
Autoencoders, KNN, Decision Trees
• Application Context: Fault detection in components like heat ex -
changers, pumps, or photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) systems relies 
heavily on time-series data. LSTM models are particularly suitable 
due to their ability to capture temporal dependencies.
• Comparative Effectiveness: LSTM networks outperform traditional 
models in sequential data modelling but are more computationally 
demanding. Autoencoders are useful for anomaly detection and 
dimensionality reduction. Decision Trees and KNN offer fast classi -
fication but may lack precision in complex failure scenarios.
To synthesize the practical implications of applying AI techniques in 
TESs, Table 6 benchmarks commonly used algorithms in terms of their 
best application context, expected accuracy, and computational re -
quirements. While fully normalized accuracy-to-computation ratios are 
dataset-dependent and thus omitted, the table offers a qualitative 
overview to guide selection based on performance vs. complexity trade- 
offs.
Emerging hybrid models that combine physical modelling with AI (i. 
e., physics-informed ML) offer promising improvements in interpret -
ability and generalizability. Moreover, federated learning and edge AI 
are poised to enable distributed intelligence in thermal systems, facili -
tating faster and more secure decision-making at the device level.
4.4. Applications of AI in thermal energy systems
With its ability to temporarily store and reallocate thermal energy, 
thermal energy storage is a flexible technology with a significant impact 
on energy conservation and renewable energy sources. Its duties include 
thermal buffering, demand curve flattening, and energy output stabili -
zation. Thermal energy storage helps bridge the supply-demand gap at 
night and during cloudy conditions by reducing the sporadic nature of 
solar radiation in concentrated solar power plants. Additionally, it can 
be used in wind farms to maximize the use of wind resources and in 
combined heat and power plants, which are usually used in conjunction 
with electricity generation and heat supply [ 187 – 189 ]. It is becoming 
more and more advantageous to combine thermal energy storage with 
AI. TES is essential for district energy networks, which use AI techniques 
Table 6 
A Concise Comparison of Key AI Algorithms Used in TESs.
Algorithm Best Use Case Typical 
Accuracy
Computational 
Load *
Notes
XGBoost
Performance 
prediction
High Moderate
Fast, robust to 
overfitting
ANN
Forecasting, 
control
Mod. – 
High
High
Requires careful 
hyperparameter 
tuning
RL (DQN)
Real-time 
control
High High
Learns optimal 
policies 
dynamically
LSTM
Time-series 
fault detection
Very 
High
Very High
Ideal for 
sequential data
PSO
Multi- 
objective 
optimization
Moderate High
Effective for 
complex search 
problems
ANFIS
Adaptive 
control in 
uncertain 
conditions
High Moderate
Balances 
accuracy and 
interpretability
*
Qualitative scale : Low < Moderate < High < Very High (based on memory 
use, training time, and complexity).
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
15 
--- PAGE 16 ---
to link different energy sources and consumers for environmental and 
economic advantages. AI, which simulates human cognitive processes 
like learning and problem-solving, is becoming increasingly well-liked 
because of its potential to increase efficacy and efficiency [ 190 ].
AI methods, like fuzzy logic and ANN, are inspired by natural phe -
nomena, animal behaviour, and human brains. These methods are used 
in programming, optimization, operational control, and performance 
prediction. Through reasoning or modelling, AI generates robust solu -
tions using approximate models. Although AI cannot produce flawless 
outcomes, it can handle ambiguity, imprecision, and partial truth, which 
makes it appropriate for challenging real-world issues. AI techniques 
save time by requiring fewer computational resources than physics- 
based model simulations like CFD. One important tool in using AI in 
thermal energy storage is fuzzy logic, which focuses on optimizing 
thermal energy storage design and operational control and predicting 
thermal energy storage performance. Solar water and air heaters, 
building HVAC systems, district heating and cooling systems, power 
plants, building envelopes, and PCM heat sinks for electronic cooling are 
just a few of the many applications of this technology [ 191 ]. Fig. 5
outlines AI ’ s applications in thermal energy storage, focusing on per -
formance prediction, design, and operational control optimization. Prior 
research articles have thoroughly examined the application of AI tech -
niques in thermal energy storage.
While AI-driven optimization techniques offer remarkable im -
provements in predictive accuracy, control precision, and real-time 
adaptability of TESs, they also come with significant computational 
challenges that must not be overlooked. Advanced models such as deep 
neural networks, RL frameworks, and large-scale data-driven simula -
tions demand substantial processing power, often relying on energy- 
intensive GPUs or high-performance computing infrastructure [ 190 ]. 
This computational overhead contributes to increased energy con -
sumption, which can, paradoxically, undermine the sustainability ob -
jectives of the energy systems being optimized. Moreover, training these 
models requires access to extensive datasets and long convergence 
times, which may not be feasible for all applications, particularly in 
resource-constrained or decentralized environments. Therefore, careful 
trade-off analysis between performance gains and computational costs is 
essential, and future research should focus on developing lightweight AI 
models and efficient hardware integration strategies that minimize 
environmental and operational burdens while retaining optimization 
efficacy.
4.4.1. Predictive maintenance in AI-powered thermal energy system 
prediction
An approach known as “ predictive maintenance ” was created by IBM 
in the 1980s. It uses various data analysis techniques to find irregular -
ities in equipment and procedures, spot possible flaws, and fix them 
before they become serious breakdowns [ 192 ]. The ability of AI to 
forecast TESs is transforming sustainability and energy management. 
Demand forecasting, system efficiency, and thermal energy production 
optimization have all shown promise with ML and DL approaches. AI 
and its learning techniques provide a quick and efficient means of 
problem-solving and scenario prediction using historical data. AI can 
greatly enhance thermal management by precisely forecasting circum -
stances and identifying the best solutions.
Several studies have adopted it in recent years to predict the per -
formance of thermal energy storage. In order to predict the performance 
of a supercritical CO
2 
Brayton cycle (s-CO
2
BC) in combination with a 
wind farm-based molten salt energy storage system, For instance, [ 193 ] 
used AI. Utilizing the Grasshopper Optimisation Algorithm (GOA) and 
Fig. 5. Diagram showing how AI techniques are being used in the thermal energy storage [ 191 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
16 
--- PAGE 17 ---
PSO, the Multilayer Perceptron ANN was trained. The complex in -
teractions of molten salt energy storage, the wind farm, and the s-CO
2
BC 
components are modelled by the AI models. Under various operational 
conditions, integrated system simulations were used to train the per -
formance prediction model. Average absolute percentage deviations 
from the PSO approach ranged from 0.47 % to 0.51 % over a range of 
parameters, while those from the GOA approach ranged from 0.05 % to 
0.27 %. The research boosts AI-based optimisation techniques and im -
proves grid integration and stability. For the purpose of predicting the 
electrical and thermal efficiency of a water-based photovoltaic-thermal 
(PV/T) system, Safae et al. [ 194 ] developed ML models.
There are three ML algorithms that were selected because of their 
ability to interpret complex data and provide accurate predictions. 
These algorithms include the Gradient Boosting Regressor (GBR), the 
Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP), and the Light Gradient-Boosting Ma -
chine. Both the training and verification of the models were accom -
plished by utilizing data from 15,540 samples taken from a water-based 
PV/T system. The MLP method had the highest R2 value of 0.0906, 
making it the most accurate predictor of electrical energy when 
compared to other GBR and LGB algorithms. This was proved by the LGB 
algorithm’s R
2 
score of 0.983, which demonstrated its effectiveness in 
estimating thermal energy. For the purpose of predicting the energy 
performance of a PV/T system that is based on an Ag/water nanofluid, 
various modifications were made to the most efficient MLP and LGB 
models. In spite of the fact that there was no actual data available, this 
indicated that the models were indeed valuable for practical applica -
tions. Furthermore, [ 195 ] created AI models to forecast thermal power 
plant emissions of nitrogen oxide. The AI model used in the study had 
more coal input features than boiler features, such as volatility, total 
moisture, fixed carbon, ash and sulphur content, and more. The study 
concentrated on the performance of AI models and the significance of 
the analysis of input features. The findings demonstrated that the 
number of features greatly impacts the model’s performance. Eight 
distinct input features produced the best model performance. With an 
exceptional coefficient of determination of 0.97, the nitrogen oxide 
emissions prediction model for thermal power plants was accurate and 
feasible. High prediction precision was demonstrated by the calculated 
predictive values’ close alignment with actual values.
Odufuwa et al. [ 196 ] demonstrated a predictive model that uses Ice 
Thermal Energy Storage (ITES) to forecast HVAC system performance. 
Indicators such as chiller power consumption, cooling thermal load, 
COP, and storage temperature were used in the model. Using nonlinear 
input variables to forecast ITES system configurations, the study 
employed an ANN model created using a shallow neural net fitting 
application. The model is trained, validated, and tested using perfor -
mance metrics such as Mean Squared Errors (MSE) and Regression (R). 
The MSE was primarily less than 20 %, and the R values ranged from 
0.94 to 0.99. The study emphasized the accuracy of ANN in predicting 
HVAC system parameters and the effect of parameter variation on ITES 
cooling systems. In another study, [ 197 ] analysed the NuScale VOYGR 
SMR module in RELAP5-3D, a Thermal Energy Storage system, and how 
it integrates and controls a Small Modular Reactor (SMR). The study 
utilised a two-tank thermal energy storage system and Model Predictive 
Control (MPC) to maximize the thermal energy storage system’s per -
formance in tandem with the SMR. Simulations, including accident 
scenarios, were used to evaluate the system’s performance and response.
The California independent system operator database provided 
actual energy demand data, which the study scaled to account for the 
power generation of a single SMR. According to the results, a thermal 
energy storage system integrated with an SMR can improve performance 
compared to an SMR operating alone, but in some cases, the overall 
power mismatch may worsen. Arcos–Aviles et al. [ 198 ] demonstrated a 
model predictive controller-based energy management system for a 
remote electro-thermal microgrid in Ecuador’s Amazon region. Mixed 
integer quadratic programming was used to formulate the optimization 
problem, and the FICO Xpress solver was used to solve it. Future 
irradiance and load data were taken into account when running simu -
lations. Analysis was done on how the prediction horizon affected the 
microgrid’s performance. The findings demonstrated that operational 
microgrid cost, battery degradation, and temperature RMSE tracking 
decreased while optimizing PV resource utilization with increasing 
prediction horizon. Comparing the 24-h horizon to the 8-h horizon, the 
24-h horizon decreased by 6.71 % and 15.68 %. The benefits of the MPC 
approach include a 31.57 % decrease in PV curtailment, a 5.86 % 
reduction in operating costs, better battery SOC planning, and an 
extension of the ESS lifetime.
Moreover, a new in silico thermal management approach for fuel cell 
systems utilizing GANs and RL was presented in the study by [ 199 ]. An 
RL agent can be trained to dynamically control system parameters using 
the realistic thermal management scenarios that GANs produce. The 
adversarial network can be trained using simulation results or historical 
data to produce a variety of scenarios illustrating the intricate connec -
tion between a fuel cell’s thermodynamics and working point. In 
response to the generated working point, the RL agent adjusts cooling- 
influencing parameters like coolant flow rates, air stoichiometry, or 
reactant humidification. The method demonstrated notable gains in 
robustness, durability, and thermal efficiency. Also, [ 200 ]‘s study 
investigated how ML could be used to maximize the efficiency of com -
bined cycle power plants. It suggested an AI-coherent modelling strategy 
that concentrates on control and environmental factors. By adjusting 
optimal parameters and simulating multiple scenarios, the model 
enhanced efficiency using the Broyden Fletcher Goldfarb Shanno algo -
rithm. Power generation increased from 452 MW to 462.1 MW, a 2.23 % 
increase. The study also emphasized the advantages of data-driven 
modelling, including its high accuracy, ability to improve with new 
data continuously, and ability to identify patterns that are challenging 
for human analysts. In the study by [ 201 ], the integration of RF, SVM, 
and ANN in three different kinds of solar prediction algorithms was 
examined. The findings demonstrate that, compared to SVM and RF 
algorithms, the ANN algorithm performed exceptionally well in terms of 
MAE (0.9558) and MFE (0.4466). This method can aid in planning and 
distribution in renewable power systems by tackling issues with inter -
mittent and uncertain renewable sources.
Shaban et al. [ 202 ] study offered an AI-powered method for creating 
the best PV/T cooling systems. Preprocessing, prediction, and data 
collection were all part of the system. Water, air, and electricity effi -
ciency was predicted using the Optimized Deep Neural Network 
(ODNN). The model’s efficacy was increased using Sand Cat Swarm 
Optimization. According to the results, ODNN performs better regarding 
MAE, MSE, and R
2
, indicating that it is a useful tool for designing PV/T 
cooling systems. The ability of the AI-driven method to maximize system 
operational efficiency was also shown. Finally, the study by [ 203 ] pre -
sented a technique for designing and optimizing thermal energy storage 
systems that combine ML and CFD. The approach trained ML models, 
such as K-nearest neighbour regression, linear regression, gradient boost 
regression, LightGBM, XGBoost, and neural networks, using heat dis -
charging parametrizations from CFD. These models provide an effective 
substitute for conventional CFD simulations, allowing temperatures in 
compact thermal energy storage modules to be predicted under various 
circumstances.
Compared to full-scale CFD simulations, the ML-based method saves 
over 99 % of the computational time and costs, making it suitable for 
various thermal energy storage designs and geometries. Green roofs are 
becoming more and more significant in the design and retrofit of 
buildings for energy efficiency. Li et al. [ 204 ] introduced a new AI model 
framework that uses SHapley Additive Explanations and graph convo -
lution to enhance their thermal performance. Using experimental data 
from green roofs outside the building and meteorological data from 
Shanghai, the model forecasts the surface temperatures of green roofs 
both inside and outside. Several metrics were employed to assess the 
model’s predictive performance, demonstrating high accuracy. Based on 
the SHAP findings, the primary determinants of green roof thermal 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
17 
--- PAGE 18 ---
performance are soil surface temperature and canopy temperature. 
Hajialigol et al. [ 205 ] investigated the application of organic Rankine 
flash cycles in conjunction with a Brayton cycle, emphasizing exergy, 
thermodynamic, and energy-economic analyses. Through the burning of 
methane from biomass gasification, the cycle produced thermal energy. 
The study also looked at several working fluids, such as toluene, ethyl -
benzene, m-, o-, and p-xylene. According to predictions made with an 
ANN, p-Xylene is the working fluid that most increases energy effi -
ciency. By 10 %, the enhanced cycle reduced energy destruction. 
Nevertheless, double flash evaporators increased energy efficiency by 3 
% while raising the cost of power generation units by more than 10 %.
Kijo-Kleczkowska et al. [ 206 ] created a model based on fuzzy logic to 
forecast the highest amounts of heat generated by materials under test at 
particular temperatures. They postulated that maximum heat values and 
pollutant emissions are reflected in the calorific value and composition 
of the materials and that the model predicts maximum heat values 
during the thermal processes under analysis. The study by [ 207 ] 
considered heat source and thermal slip effects while analysing heat 
transfer in Williamson fluid flow using AI. Equations of momentum and 
energy were used to formulate the flow. The neural network model with 
the best validation performance, 5.9676 × 10
  8
, was trained using the 
Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. The study also found that the Nusselt 
number exhibited decreasing trends, whereas the heat generation and 
thermal slip parameters were higher in non-magnetic flow fields.
Despite the promising accuracy of AI models in predicting TES per -
formance, a critical limitation lies in their frequent reliance on steady- 
state or average-condition datasets. Such datasets often fail to capture 
the dynamics of extreme operational scenarios (such as abrupt load 
surges, component failures, or climatic extremes) which are increasingly 
common in real-world applications. As a result, models trained solely on 
nominal data may yield inaccurate or unstable predictions when 
exposed to atypical but realistic conditions. To enhance model robust -
ness and adaptability, future development should integrate transient 
and extreme-case datasets, possibly through data augmentation, syn -
thetic stress-test simulations, or real-time adaptive learning algorithms. 
Furthermore, combining AI with physics-informed modelling can pro -
vide better generalization and improve reliability, especially under non- 
linear and rapidly changing boundary conditions. This approach is 
essential for deploying AI-based TESs in complex and uncertain opera -
tional environments [ 204 ].
For AI models to be practically valuable and scientifically credible in 
thermal energy optimization, reproducibility and transparency are 
essential. However, many current studies [ 206 , 207 ] lack publicly 
accessible code repositories and omit key algorithmic details, such as the 
number of hidden layers, learning rates, or optimization functions used 
in neural networks. These omissions hinder experimental validation and 
slow progress in comparative benchmarking. To promote reproduc -
ibility and collaborative advancement, future research should document 
algorithm configurations comprehensively and make implementation 
code and datasets openly available through repositories such as GitHub 
or institutional archives. Encouraging open-access frameworks will 
enhance the scientific integrity, replicability, and scalability of AI- 
assisted TESs.
4.4.2. Energy consumption forecasting
Forecasting energy consumption is a crucial process in energy 
management that aids in the informed decision-making of utilities, 
businesses, and governments by estimating future usage based on past 
data and influencing factors. In energy consumption forecasting, AI- 
based models such as ANN, Support Vector Regression (SVR), and RF 
are frequently employed; ANN and SVR are the most widely used and 
well-liked models for resolving various forecasting issues. An ANN is a 
framework for various machine-learning algorithms that cooperate to 
process complex data inputs. ANFIS, Feedforward Neural Networks 
(FFNN), BackPropagation Neural Network (BPNN), wavelet neural 
networks (WNN), ESN, DL models, and others are ANN-based models 
used in energy consumption forecasting. By analysing and processing 
complex data inputs, these models improve the efficacy and efficiency of 
forecasting energy consumption [ 208 – 210 ].
Two kinds of ANN are used in energy consumption forecasting: FFNN 
and BPNN. FFNN moves forward information from input nodes to output 
nodes via hidden nodes. Using a back-propagated algorithm, BPNN 
spreads the error difference between the calculated and desired outputs 
toward hidden layers. These models have been called conventional ANN 
models in studies on forecasting energy consumption. Szoplik [ 211 ] and 
Akdemir et al. [ 212 ] used a three-layer FFNN to estimate Poland ’ s and 
Turkey ’ s energy demands. Over the past several years, a number of 
studies have been carried out for the purpose of predicting the future 
energy consumption of a variety of facilities or sectors, including 
countries. These studies have made use of a wide range of AI systems.
On the basis of the difficulties of high systematic errors and poor 
generalization that are present in combination Forecasting Models 
(FMs) that are currently in use, [ 213 ] presented a dynamic combination 
residual FM as a solution to these issues. This model is depicted in Fig. 6 . 
For the purpose of predicting the residual errors, it was agreed that 
support SVR would be used as the basic FM, and the dynamic combi -
nation FM that was developed on the basis of weights would be 
deployed. A subsequent modification was made to the value of the SVR 
predicted after that. With regard to the ideal number of combination 
terms as well as the selection of the single FM in the combination model, 
this work offers a mathematical basis for both of these decisions. The 
proposed FM has the potential to reduce the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 
of the basic model from 1918.59 kW to 349.37 kW, the Mean Absolute 
Percentage Error (MAPE) from 15.80 % to 2.96 %, and the Root Mean 
Square Error (RMSE) from 2278.74 to 471.44 according to the findings 
of a case study that was carried out in Xi ’ an. The study was conducted to 
identify the limitations of the FM.
To forecast energy statistics in the Chinese province of Shandong, Li 
and Li [ 214 ] made use of the Generalised Modelling (GM) approach. 
This was done to make predictions. An enhancement in the predict -
ability of the original prediction was achieved as a consequence of the 
utilization of the ARIMA model for forecasting residuals. The combined 
GM-ARIMA model was shown to be more accurate than the separate 
models; this was discovered by a comparison of the average relative 
errors. The differences between the two models served to illustrate this 
point.
KNN is a popular prediction algorithm because it is easy to use and 
straightforward when locating similar instances in large-dimensional 
and multivariate feature spaces. However, since it only pinpoints his -
torical, it is not a causal approach to forecasting. To enhance forecasting, 
temporal data such as the day of the week or the week of the year should 
be added to KNN [ 215 ]. Several studies have used this algorithm to 
predict the performance of energy systems. For instance, through precise 
analysis of energy requirements, the paper by [ 216 ] sought to manage 
energy production, storage, and management in the residential sector in 
an efficient manner. To predict daily energy consumption based on 
classification, the KNN classifier was used. Prediction, validation, pro -
cessing, and data collection were all steps in the process. Experiments 
using historical data from 520 apartments in Seoul showed that the best 
accuracy was achieved at a training and testing ratio of 60 – 40 %. The 
model ’ s effectiveness was verified through the use of 5-Fold and 10-Fold 
cross-validation. Similarly, a surrogate modelling technique was pre -
sented by [ 217 ] to forecast hourly cooling/heating loads for office, 
hotel, and retail buildings in high resolution throughout the year.
In EnergyPlus, it generated a load database with seven building 
features and hourly loads using 16,384 surrogate models. KNN was 
selected as the data-driven load prediction algorithm. It was discovered 
that the best metric for effective hour rates was the Manhattan distance. 
By forecasting thermal loads in Shanghai, China, the method was vali -
dated. MAPEs for cooling/heating and annual thermal loads were 5.26 
% and 6.88 %, respectively. Ramos et al. [ 218 ] investigated how ANN 
and KNN might be used to forecast building energy usage trends. 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
18 
--- PAGE 19 ---
Considering the forecasting technique to enhance predictions, the study 
employed five-minute forecasts. To increase forecast accuracy, the 
Multiarmed Bandit in RL was utilised to determine the optimal algo -
rithm for every five minutes. The study evaluates greedy algorithms and 
upper confidence bounds in three different scenarios. The findings 
demonstrated that although ANN has a lower confidence bound, KNN is 
the most reliable forecasting algorithm. KNN was more potent than 
greedy, and the average rewards demonstrated sound decision-making 
for morning, afternoon, and night to increase the accuracy of short- 
term electric load forecasting for individual users, [ 219 ] proposed a 
short-term power load FM based on K-means and FCM – BP. Using K- 
means, users were grouped into two clusters based on their electricity 
consumption characteristics.
Users with strong correlation at adjacent moments were filtered out 
of local similar data using fuzzy C-Mean clustering. Users with weak 
correlation were selected using locally similar daily data. The BPNN uses 
feather vectors as input data to predict short-term load. According to 
experimental results, the suggested clustering approach more accurately 
forecasts loads than non-clustering load forecasting because it aligns 
with users ’ electricity consumption patterns. To minimize energy con -
sumption by continuously monitoring building thermal comfort values, 
[ 220 ] demonstrated a thermal comfort monitoring system that repli -
cated commercial building occupants in hot-humid climate nations. The 
system employed six thermal comfort factors and a KNN model. With an 
accuracy rate of 72.97 % in Malaysian university lecture halls and 35.13 
% in non-hot humid climates, the model outperformed PMV in both hot 
and non-hot humid climates. Furthermore, SVRs have been employed in 
demographic studies, like those conducted by Wei-Chiang Hong [ 221 ] 
and Cao & Wu [ 222 ], to examine the growth in electricity consumption. 
The study conducted by [ 221 ] uses historical data from Taiwan ’ s 
regional electric load values to compare SVR with other techniques, such 
as neural networks and regression models. In their work, Cao and Wu 
[ 222 ] use monthly data on China ’ s electricity consumption, employing a 
hybrid approach to improve the analysis of electricity consumption and 
prevent over-selection of parameters.
Zhong et al. [ 223 ] presented a SVR technique based on vector fields 
that achieve high robustness, accuracy, and generalization ability. When 
the technique was tested on a sizable office building in China, it 
outperformed other widely used techniques. Magoul `es et al. [ 224 ] 
investigated a different algorithm for predicting building energy con -
sumption using support vector machines. A year-long dataset was used 
for the experiments, and weather and electricity use were used as in -
dependent variables and parameters, respectively. After three months of 
testing and validation, the model showed good performance. Similarly, 
the SVR-supervised ML method was utilised in the research conducted 
by [ 225 ] to evaluate the ways in which eight primary input elements 
influenced the HVAC loads in residential structures.
Out of the six meta-heuristic optimisation methods that were 
investigated, the hybrid model SVR-AEO displayed the greatest perfor -
mance in terms of modelling heating and cooling loads. Its R
2 
values 
were 0.9975 and 0.99955, respectively. For the purpose of predicting 
the amount of useful hourly energy that can be extracted from a solar 
thermal collector system, a study was conducted by [ 226 ] that compared 
decision trees (DT), tree-based ensemble ML models (RF and ET), and 
SVR. A comparison was made between them based on the correctness of 
the models, the amount of computing cost, and the potential for 
generalization. Regarding the prediction of useful solar thermal energy, 
RF and ET were equally applicable and possessed similar predictive 
power. DT required less training time but was less accurate, making it 
the most computationally efficient approach. Training times for SVR 
were three times longer than those for ET, suggesting that DT is more 
accurate than RF and ET. The relevance of predictive analytics in the 
management of decentralized energy systems is emphasized throughout 
the paper. In the research conducted by [ 227 ], a ML model was provided 
as a means of predicting the amount of energy that is utilised for heating 
residential buildings. SVR was utilised as the basis, and hybridisation 
strategies were implemented in order to integrate six different meta- 
heuristic algorithms.
For the purpose of evaluating the accuracy and performance of the 
technique in comparison to hybrid models, a case study was utilised. 
Based on the findings, it was proved that the proposed method accu -
rately predicts the amount of heating energy that is consumed by resi -
dential structures. The hybrid SVR-Battle Royale Optimisation model 
performed the best out of all the hybrid models that were investigated. 
Its R
2 
values for the train dataset were 0.999386, and its R
2 
values for 
the test dataset were 0.998898. Another tool is the Gaussian Process 
Fig. 6. FM framework with combined residual error correction [ 213 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
19 
--- PAGE 20 ---
Regression (GPR). Compared to other techniques, GPR is a more 
generalised ML model that performs exceptionally well in Bayesian 
inference about functions, especially in situations where there is insuf -
ficient training data [ 228 ].
García-Nieto et al. [ 229 ] introduced the GPR approach, a nonpara -
metric Bayesian technique to forecast energy performance in residential 
buildings in oceanic climates. With a coefficient of determination of 
0.9687, the model successfully predicts the total power output and de -
termines the significance of each predictive variable. The effectiveness 
of this novel strategy is demonstrated by the agreement between 
experimentally observed data and predicted data from the suggested 
hybrid DE/GPR-relied model. Another study by [ 230 ] examined hourly 
HVAC system energy consumption and meteorological data using a 
government office building in Ningbo as a case study. It predicted the 
short-term hourly energy consumption of building HVAC systems using 
a 12 × 12 grid search and GPR. The optimal model ’ s CV-RMSE was 
0.1035 and 0.1278, and its R
2 
was 0.9917 and 0.9863. Compared to 
ASHRAE standards, the NMBE was more accurate at 0.0575. Also, a 
paper by [ 231 ] examined the differences between using a grey-box 
model and Gaussian processes for thermal building modelling.
A single-zone office building with hydronic heating served as the 
model. The Gaussian processes outperformed the grey-box model in 
prediction errors during occupied times after three weeks of training by 
27 %. However, their large generalization error caused them to perform 
worse during unoccupied times consistently. The Gaussian processes 
were trained adaptively to lessen the effect of weather variations. Every 
24 h, the models were retrained, which decreased prediction error by 
more than 21 % and 10 %, respectively. However, the model currently 
covers only applications where prediction during occupied times is more 
relevant. By examining the impact of temperature on powertrain effi -
ciency and auxiliary power, [ 232 ] also forecasted energy consumption 
at the bus trip level. Taking driving style, spatiotemporal features, and 
speed state transition into account, a Markov-based speed profile gen -
eration technique was created. The predictions ’ accuracy was increased 
using a Markov-based Gaussian Processing Regression Model (M-GPR). 
With an average error of 8.69 %, which decreased by 0.62 % to 5.41 % 
compared to other models, the results demonstrated that M-GPR per -
formed better in prediction.
RFs is a ML model that is commonly used for producing predictions 
because to its high success rate in categorising a large data set. However, 
it requires temporal variables in order to function well [ 233 ]. When it 
came to predicting the amount of energy that was consumed by HVAC 
systems in a hotel located in Madrid, Spain, [ 234 ] contrasted RF and 
ANN. An ANN fared marginally better, with root-mean-square errors of 
4.97 and 6.10, respectively. Ensemble-based methods, on the other 
hand, delivered superior performance when dealing with complex data 
in buildings, despite the fact that RF had internal cross-validation and a 
limited number of tuning parameters. The ability of both models to 
make accurate predictions was comparable, and they were approxi -
mately equally applicable to applications involving building energy, 
estimating the amount of energy that was utilised to heat dwellings was 
accomplished by Xu et al. [ 235 ] through the utilization of the RF method 
and meta-heuristic optimisation approaches. All of the following factors 
were taken into consideration: occupancy, ambient temperature, and 
architectural elements. RMSE, MAE, Relative Absolute Error (RAE), 
Theil Inequality Coefficient (TIC), and coefficient of determination were 
the five statistical indices that were utilised in order to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the model.
The findings demonstrated the accuracy of the model ’ s ability to 
forecast energy consumption, and the performance of RF was signifi -
cantly enhanced by the application of the Arithmetic Optimisation Al -
gorithm. Following a total of 101 rounds, the Ant Lion Optimiser 
achieved a TIC value of 0.014986, demonstrating remarkable conver -
gence throughout the process. The suggested combination model did a 
much better job of predicting how much energy homes would use for 
heating than traditional methods. In the same way, [ 236 ] used Quantile 
Random Forest (QRF) to guess how much power a chiller plant in a high- 
rise office building would use. A streamlined data-driven method was 
used to figure out the lower and upper limits of the power usage pre -
diction intervals (PIs). The results showed that all chiller models had PI 
coverage probabilities above 80 % and 90 %, along with the confidence 
levels that went with them. The range of real demand charges was 3.3 
times wider than the upper and lower bounds. This difference grew by 
1.7 times when the confidence level went from 80 % to 90 %. In addi -
tion, the study by [ 237 ] showed a prediction model based on RF that 
could guess how much energy different buildings would use in the next 
few days. Five sets of data from over a year were used to test the model. 
The results showed that the MAE number was between 0.430 and 0.501 
kWh, which means that the predictions were pretty accurate.
4.5. Challenges associated with AI predictions in energy systems and 
future directions
Numerous difficulties arise when using AI to forecast energy systems, 
including the two main limitations of AI techniques in TESs: the lack of 
data available for establishing prediction models and the inability to 
reveal unknown physical knowledge and mechanisms directly [ 191 ]. 
The performance of AI systems and accurate predictions depend on high- 
quality data because noisy, out-of-date, or incomplete data can produce 
unreliable models and make training more difficult [ 238 ]. Also, AI 
models in energy systems struggle with scalability due to the vast 
amount of data produced, making successful implementation chal -
lenging across extensive operations. Finding complete, high-quality 
datasets is another major obstacle to AI energy system prediction. 
Large amounts of well-structured data must be available for these 
models to be accurate. On the other hand, inaccurate data can result 
from incomplete, noisy, or fragmented data. Using efficient data 
collection and preprocessing techniques reduces this problem and en -
hances model performance [ 239 ].
Furthermore, compatibility problems and the need for real-time 
processing make integrating AI solutions into energy management in -
frastructures difficult. Standardized and modular architectures are 
required for these systems to operate smoothly and perform better. 
Operators find it challenging to comprehend complex AI models, such as 
DL models, because they struggle with interpretability despite 
frequently delivering high accuracy. This lack of transparency may 
make Critical energy systems difficult to adopt [ 240 , 241 ]. Research 
recommends hybrid models combining domain expertise and AI to 
enhance interpretability and support better decision-making. A multi -
disciplinary strategy integrating AI technology developments and en -
ergy system knowledge is required to address obstacles in energy 
systems. The future of energy management will be shaped by the 
cooperation of academia, business, and policymakers to fully realize AI ’ s 
potential for efficient and sustainable energy systems. AI integration in 
TESs is a quickly developing field with many potential research avenues, 
including important areas for further investigation. Some of these areas 
include: 
• Future research can examine how AI-driven methods can optimize 
TESs in real-time, emphasizing algorithms that adjust to shifting 
supply and demand.
• Future research can also employ RL and sophisticated AI techniques 
to create data-driven control strategies to optimize the operations of 
TESs.
• Future research can examine how AI methods can optimize district 
heating networks to increase effectiveness, cut expenses, and mini -
mize environmental effects.
The current global energy consumption scenario can be character -
ized by four major aspects: rapid growth in overall energy consumption, 
high dependence on non-renewable resources, unequal distribution of 
fossil fuels, and considerable geopolitical and economic barriers 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
20 
--- PAGE 21 ---
[ 242 , 243 ]. In this context, optimizing energy performance has become 
an important social, political, and economic factor in every country. A 
prominent, innovative and disruptive factor that can enhance the per -
formance and efficiency of TESs is the use of AI and ML, especially when 
associated with control systems. Renewables, especially solar and wind 
energy, are complementary and essential solutions to bridge traditional 
and non-traditional limitations.
Although several insist that current and future sources of renewable 
energies are capable of meeting global energy demand, a few challenges 
need to be addressed in the thermal energy sector, such as a lack of 
production time or available space [ 244 ]. In this context, some chal -
lenges with thermal energy need to be addressed, such as energy storage, 
microgrids, or hybrid configurations with energy backup [ 245 , 246 ]. The 
promising potential of nanotechnology is an important aspect in meeting 
this challenge, as it is in the traditional arena of improving heat transfer, 
deposition, and efficiency of thermal energy [ 247 ]. However, nano -
materials are also promising solutions for energy storage and other 
specific requirements for many advanced configurations of renewable 
and biothermal systems in which thermal effects must be addressed 
[ 248 , 249 ].
5. Synergy of nanotechnology and AI in optimizing thermal 
energy systems
The synergy between nanotechnology and AI is transforming the 
optimization of TESs [ 250 ]. When combining nanotechnology with AI ’ s 
intelligent and data-processing aspects, energy systems are becoming 
more flexible, innovative, and self-regulating [ 251 ]. This integration 
allows real-time control and optimization, which has greatly improved 
how energy is produced, stored, and regulated [ 252 , 253 ].
5.1. Integration of nanotechnology and AI
Nanotechnology and AI are the two most powerful technologies 
changing the approach to managing TESs and energy generation, stor -
age, and regulation. These systems are gradually becoming self- 
optimizing by integrating the physical progress of nanotechnology 
with the analytical and prognostic features of AI. This integration of two 
systems allows for real-time control and maximization of the benefits of 
nanomaterials enhanced thermal conductivity while receiving guidance 
from AI [ 254 ].
This subsection elucidates the intricate mechanisms through which 
nanotechnology (NT) and AI synergize to optimize TESs. AI algorithms, 
including ML and advanced optimization techniques, significantly 
accelerate the discovery, design, and synthesis of novel nanomaterials 
possessing tailored thermal properties. Conversely, the distinctive ca -
pabilities of nanomaterials (such as their expansive surface area, 
enhanced thermal conductivity, and tuneable properties) provide un -
precedented avenues for developing more efficient and intelligent AI- 
driven thermal management solutions [ 253 ]. For instance, AI-guided 
synthesis facilitates the creation of advanced phase-change materials, 
ML models accurately predict nanofluid performance, and AI optimizes 
the designs of nanostructured heat exchangers, collectively showcasing 
these powerful synergistic effects [ 254 ].
A critical component of this section is the economic quantification of 
these NT-AI synergies. This analysis details the financial benefits and 
implications stemming from the integration of these advanced tech -
nologies. It encompasses potential cost reductions in both material 
synthesis and system operation, significant energy efficiency gains 
translating into substantial savings, and robust projections for return on 
investment (ROI) across various NT-AI applications within thermal 
systems. Furthermore, the discussion highlights market growth pro -
jections for these converged technologies, identifying new economic 
opportunities and assessing the feasibility of their large-scale imple -
mentation. Supporting this analysis are relevant economic data, detailed 
industry case studies, and future projections, which collectively 
underscore the compelling economic rationale behind leveraging NT-AI 
synergy for sustainable and highly efficient thermal energy management 
[ 255 ].
5.1.1. Conceptual framework for integration
The framework for integrating nanotechnology and AI relies on two 
key components: nanomaterials and artificial intelligent control sys -
tems. Nanofluids, NePCMs, and nano-coatings are used to improve the 
thermal performance of the systems by increasing heat transfer and 
storage rates [ 255 ]. For instance, the nanofluids containing copper or 
graphene nanoparticles exhibit significantly enhanced thermal con -
ductivity than conventional fluids for application in heat exchangers and 
refrigeration systems. AI supports these materials by providing real-time 
tracking, data processing, and adaptive decision-making. Such ML ap -
plications include systems ’ ability to predict thermal loads, automati -
cally optimize the operating parameters, and achieve the best energy 
efficiency. In solar thermal systems, AI can control nanofluids ’ flow rate 
and maintain the heat absorption and transfer rate despite the changes 
in the external environment [ 13 ].
5.1.2. Key technologies and techniques
Several technologies and techniques play a crucial role in success -
fully integrating nanotechnology and AI within TESs: 
• Nanofluids: Base fluids can be water or ethylene glycol, and nano -
particles added are aluminium oxide (Al
2
O
3
) or silicon carbide (SiC). 
These nanoparticles enhance the thermal conduct and storage ca -
pacity to enable heat transfer at a faster rate. Based on the current 
system requirements, AI-based models control the flow and tem -
perature of nanofluids [ 256 ].
• Nano-Coatings: Nanoparticle coatings in thin layers on heat 
exchanger surfaces minimize fouling and improve heat transfer. 
These coatings also have anti-corrosive and self-cleaning features, 
requiring little or no maintenance. Nano-sensors are used to observe 
signs of fouling in real-time and thus adjust cleaning cycles to 
guarantee constant high performance [ 257 ].
• AI Algorithms: Multilevel AI, such as neural networks, RL, and GA, 
enhance system performance by analysing Nano-sensors ’ massive 
data. These algorithms forecast system performance, estimate the 
energy requirement, and control parameters proactively. For 
instance, RL allows systems to learn from previous performance and 
optimize energy use in real time [ 258 ].
5.1.3. Practical impact
Novelties in nanotechnology and AI provide a potential for 
improving the efficiency of the otherwise conventionally run TESs. 
These working fluids in the systems are enhanced by incorporating 
nanotechnology particles in heat transfer processes, and the systems are 
then controlled in real-time by AI. The outcome is quicker heat ex -
change, higher combustion or electrolysis rates, and faster system starts 
without subjecting the system to dangerous conditions. While most 
thermal energy processes are analysed under steady-state conditions, 
which imply continuous and constant operation, non-ideal transient 
conditions frequently cause performance problems; with the help of 
nanotechnology AI provides solutions to these challenges by enabling 
systems to attain a steady state faster and more effectively. When 
enhanced with nanotechnology and phase change physics, the funda -
mental thermodynamics equations enhance understanding of the system 
behaviour and significantly improve system performance [ 259 ].
5.2. Case studies of combined approaches
The case studies in this section demonstrate the application of AI 
tools to enhance surface modification processes at the atomic level and 
enhance the performance of several components in TESs. They are 
heated surfaces, silicon carbide heat transport fibres, contaminated and 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
21 
--- PAGE 22 ---
evaporating porous surfaces, and crystal growth systems. Various 
research units conduct studies in a given institution to strengthen the 
technologies in these important fields.
Many recent approaches utilizing AI are explored as follows: 
• Optimization of Nanoscale Structures: This strategy uses AI tools to 
optimize nanoscale structures as a design strategy. In earlier studies, 
genetic or evolutionary algorithms have been integrated with 
detailed performance simulations to accomplish these optimizations. 
The performance enhancement is qualitatively determined by pa -
rameters like thermal conductivity and heat transfer coefficient; 
hence, the enhancement is quantifiable [ 260 ].
• Surface Modification Choices: In this approach, AI helps make de -
cisions about surfaces that affect several micro/nanoscale phenom -
ena across the material. GA are used to control thermal variation and 
surface contaminant behaviour at the same time. The effectiveness of 
these changes can be assessed by experimental verification, which 
involves thermodynamic efficiency tests and monitoring of the pa -
rameters during operation [ 261 ].
5.2.1. Nanofluid-based heat exchangers with AI control
The first case study is based on a heat exchanger system employing a 
nanofluid in an industrial cooling process. This system exploits a copper 
nanofluid to improve the thermal conductivity of the coolant used in the 
system. An AI system constantly observes key process parameters, 
including temperature and flow rate, through nano-sensors. The flow 
rates in the system can then be controlled by the AI using ML algorithms 
that allow the system to adapt the flow rates in real-time to changes in 
heat load. This flexibility has translated into a 20 % increase in energy 
efficiency and has been done without the need for operators to get 
involved. Energy consumption indicators were used to measure the ef -
ficiency improvements, showing how the system improved performance 
under different operating conditions [ 262 ].
5.2.2. AI enhanced solar thermal energy with nanomaterials
The second case study focuses on using AI optimization in a solar 
thermal system using nano-coated solar absorbers. These absorbers, 
TiO
2 
nanoparticles coated, enhance the system ’ s absorption capabilities 
and convert solar energy into heat. The AI system is used to track 
environmental factors such as the intensity of the sun and the temper -
ature of the surrounding air, and with the help of a programmed ML 
algorithm, the system determines the best settings for the operation of 
the installation and the angle of the solar panels. This system orients the 
solar panels to the proper angle and controls the circulation of nano- 
enhanced heat transfer fluids; the energy efficiency is 25 % greater 
than traditional systems. These enhancements were confirmed by field 
tests where energy, produced, and conversion efficiencies were quanti -
fied and compared to standard solar thermal systems [ 263 ]. In sum -
mary, this work has shown that applying nanotechnology and AI in TESs 
can significantly improve the thermal performance and the systems ’ 
general performance. With the help of micro/nanoscale techniques and 
engineering knowledge, the presented approach can be implemented in 
several sectors, such as renewable energy, the aerospace industry, 
manufacturing, and others. The derivations lead to enhanced energy 
practices that comply with international energy efficiency standards and 
facilitate advancement in energy technologies.
5.3. Benefits of AI-nanotechnology integration
The integration of AI with nanotechnology, which is another tech -
nology that is quickly expanding, is one of the most promising areas of 
development. Nanotechnology has various benefits that can increase the 
performance, efficiency, and efficiency of TESs. The author examines the 
most significant advantages that this relationship, which is advanta -
geous to both parties, offers in this section [ 264 ].
5.3.1. Increased efficiency and performance
1. Improved Thermal Conductivity: Nanofluids and nano-enhanced phase 
transition materials are examples of the types of materials that have 
been developed via the use of nanotechnology. In the processes of 
thermal energy conversion, the utilization of these materials leads to 
enhanced heat transfer coefficients, which in turn leads to increased 
efficiencies.
2. Real-Time Optimization: Another advantage of AI is that it enables 
constant tracking and control of the parameters of a system in real 
time. AI, using data obtained from the sensors placed in the system, 
can control the conditions under which the system operates, hence 
the efficient use of energy resources and, therefore, the reduction of 
energy use and cost.
3. Predictive Maintenance: Intelligent technologies enable predictive 
maintenance methods, which utilize analytical information to 
anticipate failures in TESs. If problems could be foreseen, mainte -
nance could be planned to prevent scheduled breakdowns, thus 
reducing the frequency of maintenance and its expenses.
5.3.2. Cost savings
1. Reduced Operational Costs: Integrating AI systems into operations 
improves efficiency and optimality, thus lowering operational costs. 
Hence, reducing energy use and increasing the system ’ s efficiency 
will greatly reduce costs in the long run.
2. Lower Maintenance Costs: Applying different elements of AI to pre -
dictive maintenance plans can help minimize how often a system 
suffers from a failure and the extent of the failure. As a result, the 
maintenance cost is reduced, so it is possible to optimize the distri -
bution of funds.
5.3.3. Sustainability and environmental benefits
1. Reduced Energy Consumption: AI-nanotechnology integration leads to 
optimized TESs ’ performance, reducing energy consumption. This 
reduction is instrumental in reducing the emission of greenhouse 
gases, hence leading to a sustainable energy environment.
2. Utilization of Renewable Energy Sources: The integration improves the 
effectiveness of solar TESs, leading to using renewable energy sour -
ces. The effectiveness of these systems can be enhanced to reduce 
dependency on fossil fuels, hence enriching the use of clean energy.
5.3.4. Improved system flexibility
1. Dynamic Response to Environmental Changes: AI helps TESs respond to 
changes in environmental factors such as temperature and humidity. 
It makes the system ’ s performance very reliable because it can work 
at its best despite the prevailing conditions.
2. Customization and Flexibility: The integration enables one to create 
solutions that can be customized to suit a particular use and setting. 
AI algorithms can capture unique operation parameters and thus 
develop systems that efficiently meet certain energy requirements.
5.3.5. Research and Development
1. Accelerated Innovation: AI and nanotechnology complement each 
other to enhance the fast development of research and innovation. 
Through simulation and modelling by AI, time is saved in experi -
mentation and testing, hence the quick development of thermal en -
ergy technologies.
2. Interdisciplinary Collaboration: The integration fosters working in 
teams and model experts from materials science, thermal engineer -
ing, and data analytics. It fosters the exchange of knowledge and can 
result in solutions that are unique and take advantage of the pecu -
liarities of the disciplines involved.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
22 
--- PAGE 23 ---
5.4. Challenges and barriers to integration
Integrating nanotechnology and AI in TESs presents a promising 
avenue for enhancing efficiency and performance. However, several 
challenges and barriers must be addressed to realize the full potential of 
these technologies. This section outlines the primary obstacles hindering 
their successful integration.
5.4.1. Technical challenges
1. The complexity of Nanomaterials: This behaviour is because the 
properties of nanomaterials are quite different from the material ’ s 
properties at the macro scale. This complexity requires the devel -
opment of enhanced characterization methods and using models to 
estimate their behaviour in TESs. A lack of standard assessment 
procedures can lead to doubt concerning using such materials.
2. Data Quality and Quantity: AI systems require large amounts of high- 
quality data to train and make decisions for them to be effective. 
However, information obtained from nanotechnology applications 
may be scarce, incoherent, or of low credibility. This scarcity can 
limit the creation of accurate AI models crucial for enhancing TESs.
3. Integration of Multi-Scale Models: Coupling nanoscale phenomena 
with macroscale thermal systems requires consistent multi-scale 
modelling strategies. Constructing models of how nanomaterials 
interact with larger systems is challenging and may require compu -
tational resources.
5.4.2. Economic barriers
1. High Development Costs: The R & D period may be expensive when 
integrating nanotechnology and AI. Lack of capital may limit the 
feasibility of research institutions and companies engaging in inno -
vative projects, especially for small institutions with inadequate 
capital to invest in the projects.
2. Market Readiness and Commercialization: It is not always easy to scale 
up innovations made in the laboratory to true commercial products. 
This situation means that industry stakeholders may avoid adopting 
new technologies with no prior market standard or a track record of 
success. This, coupled with the long testing, validation, and certifi -
cation period, will only add to the slowdown of the commercializa -
tion of integrated technologies.
5.4.3. Regulatory and safety concerns
1. Regulatory Frameworks: The current and future legal frameworks 
regarding utilizing nanotechnology and AI raise the question of de -
velopers ’ risk. This lack of specificity may impede the implementa -
tion of such technologies into recognized structures. Such regulatory 
agencies need to set the right benchmarks on how nanomaterials and 
AI in TESs can be used safely to avoid harming society.
2. Health and Environmental Impacts: Possible hazards that nano -
materials pose to the environment and the people in the community 
must be examined. Some of the issues, such as the safety of nano -
particles and the effects of nanoparticles on human health, can be 
considered major challenges for nanoparticle technology 
distribution.
5.4.4. Interdisciplinary cooperation
1. Siloed Research and Expertise: There is a need to collaborate with 
material science and thermal engineering experts, AI, and other 
related experts to integrate nanotechnology and AI effectively. 
However, such efforts are typically isolated, limiting interaction and 
cross-disciplinary information sharing.
2. Training and Skill Development: This is due to the fast-growing nature 
of the nanotechnology and AI industries, which require constant 
continuing professional development for its workers. The skills re -
searchers and practitioners should have to work with these tech -
nologies are essential, so a great investment in educational programs 
is needed.
6. Recent advances and innovations
Renewable energy sources such as solar and wind energy are inex -
haustible. Still, their availability depends on the presence of wind and 
daylight hours to harness solar energy, and therefore, they are subject to 
periodic fluctuations. These fluctuations pose challenges that prompt 
researchers and stakeholders to search for energy storage and manage -
ment solutions. One of the methods used recently to develop thermal 
storage, charging, and discharging technologies is the integration of 
PCMs with nanoparticles such as Al
2
O
3 
and CuO, in addition to intro -
ducing AI technologies to achieve the best energy management and 
utilization. These advanced technologies are not limited to renewable 
energy applications only but also to all applications related to thermal 
energy, such as buildings and heat exchangers, to achieve sustainability 
and provide energy.
6.1. Cutting-edge research in nanotechnology for thermal energy
The technology of integrating nanoparticles into PCMs (Called 
NePCM) has recently taken the largest place in the interests of re -
searchers compared to other technologies, such as the technology of the 
nanofluids used to maximize thermal performance [ 265 ]. Arıcı et al. 
[ 266 ] presented a numerical investigation to improve the PCM melting 
process in a square cell using variable size and position fins and CuO 
nanoparticles. The charging process is carried out by applying a heat 
flux to the two walls while the other remains thermally insulated. Their 
results indicate that CuO nanoparticles in PCM significantly enhance the 
charging rate even with small fins. In the thermal energy storage unit as 
Fig. 7. Pear-shaped and finned container [ 267 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
23 
--- PAGE 24 ---
pear-shaped and finned, as shown in Fig. 7 .
Murad et al. [ 267 ] conducted a numerical analysis on the phase 
change process of NePCM containing Al
2
O
3 
nanoparticle. The equations 
governing heat transfer were numerically solved using the finite element 
method enthalpy-porosity method. Their findings pointed out that the 
increase in the concentration of Al
2
O
3 
nanoparticle nanoparticles im -
proves the melting rate because adding 6 % of Al
2
O
3 
to the PCM shortens 
the melting time by 12.5 %. They also suggested using thinner and 
longer fins to increase the melting rate since heat diffusion in the far 
regions of the thermal storage unit was also high. Basem [ 268 ], in his 
recent study, conducted a numerical study to demonstrate the charging 
of a semi-cylindrical cell-filled paraffin RT58 as PCM. The vertical 
straight-walled cell has been exposed to a constant heat flux by circu -
lating hot pure water and hot nanofluid (Al
2
O
3
-water), and the curved 
wall is fully insulated. Enthalpy and porosity were employed quantita -
tively using the ANSYS/FLUENT 22 program to analyse the study. The 
results also indicated that the complete melting time of paraffin was 3 %, 
4 %, and 5 % less when using 10 %, 20 %, and 30 % nanofluid con -
centrations than water. In thermal applications such as heat exchangers.
Motevali et al. [ 269 ] conducted a numerical study to investigate the 
melting process of PCM in a double-tube heat exchanger. RT82 was used 
as the PCM, and SWCNT as the nanoparticles. The concentrations of 
NePCM were 1, 2, and 3 %. The findings provided by the authors showed 
that integrating NePCM in the heat exchanger improves thermal per -
formance, decreasing the melting process by 39 %. Ghalambaz et al. 
[ 270 ] have suggested CuO and GO as nanoparticles for improving 
NePCM integrated with a layer of copper foam to optimize the thermal 
performance of the shell-and-tube Latent Heat Thermal Energy Storage 
(LHTES). To improve thermal conduction around the tube and reduce 
interference with the suppression of convection, the copper foam was 
arranged in an irregular geometrical pattern around the tube, as illus -
trated in Fig. 8 , while the remaining part of the shell was packed with 
NePCM.
Heat transfer was modelled by solving the partial differential equa -
tions of conservation of both momentum and energy. In their respective 
experiments, they found that the nanoparticles added minimized the 
melting time by 12 % when compared to PCM alone. Furthermore, it was 
also observed that CuO nanoparticles were marginally better than GO 
nanoparticles in heat transfer enhancement. Zahid et al. [ 271 ] con -
ducted an experimental study of heat sinks for cooling electronic de -
vices, comparing three types: straight, round, pin-finned heat sinks and 
copper foam heat sinks. They were evaluated against NePCM containing 
RT54HC/Al
2
O
3
, with the percentage of Al
2
O
3 
ranging from 0.15 to 0.25, 
to improve performance and thermal management. The heat sinks tested 
included straight, round, pin-finned heat sinks and copper foam heat 
sinks with a heat flux of 0.98 kW/m
2
, along with NePCM containing 
0.25 wt% Al
2
O
3 
nanoparticles. The results showed that the base 
temperature was reduced by 21.3 %, 25.03 %, and 36.2 %, respectively.
In cooling of batteries applications, Al-Rashed [ 272 ] developed a 
numerical study whereby hybrid nanofluid and NePCM were used to 
cool a lithium-ion battery that housed cylindrical cells. The finite 
element approach is used to conduct the simulations. According to the 
data, nanoparticle suspensions in PCM enhance thermal regulation. As a 
result, the PCM ’ s melting and solidification times are decreased. A 
typical battery pack was used to examine the thermal protection per -
formance of macro/nano-enhanced organic PCM (RT-44) for low to high 
discharge rates in the experimental work by Temel et al. [ 273 ]. Simi -
larly, under the same conditions, NePCM increases the effective thermal 
protection time of the battery by 32 % – 117 %, varying with the 
discharge rates. Consequently, reducing the cooling time for the next 
usage is the primary outcome of NePCM ’ s contribution. NePCM into 
buildings is a new technology with great potential for minimizing 
thermal energy penetration into buildings, and green buildings improve 
indoor thermal comfort with minimal energy usage.
Ashok et al. [ 274 ] conducted an experimental work in which NePCM 
composite was directly poured into the matrix of a solid concrete hollow 
block of size 400 mm × 200 mm × 100 mm. These concrete blocks are 
used to build a one-meter cube experimental building to study the 
thermal implications of using this NePCM in buildings. Their findings 
proved that the NePCM-integrated building had a lower temperature 
with a delta of 5.3 
◦
C to 1.1 
◦
C than the building without NePCM. More 
recently, Li et al. [ 275 ] conducted an experimental analysis of the 
impact of nanoparticle migration on the thermal conductivity of NePCM 
in multilayer glazing, which is applied to windows and roofs. Thickness 
and tilt angle, which are the design parameters of NePCM, can be 
optimized using energy consumption and temperature differences be -
tween indoors and outdoors. The findings of their studies showed that 
NePCM ’ s photoconversion efficiency and thermal conductivity are 
sensitive to the internal nanofluid movement and the cavity geometry. 
In addition, transverse NePCM has a relatively even temperature dis -
tribution across the width of the plate. According to the simulation re -
sults, NePCM with a 30
◦
tilt angle is the most suitable for thermal 
performance improvement, and the thermal performance of a building 
can also be improved by using thicker windows and thinner roofs. There 
has been research conducted on NePCM in the context of renewable 
energy systems, such as PV.
According to Abdollahi and Rahimi [ 276 ], the photovoltaic panel ’ s 
passive cooling mechanism makes use of natural water circulation. This 
is discussed in the article. As shown in Fig. 9 , the PCM container, which 
had a zigzag shape that was specifically designed for it, was able to 
effectively reject undesired heat from the cooling water by increasing 
the area that was available for heat transfer.
The primary component of the PCM was a composite oil that was 
composed of 82 wt% coconut oil and 18 wt% sunflower oil throughout 
Fig. 8. Shell-and-tube reinforced with copper foam and PCM/NePCM [ 270 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
24 
--- PAGE 25 ---
the initial round of experiments. During the succeeding round of ex -
periments, the composite oil was created by integrating Boehmite 
nanopowder as NePCM at a concentration of 0.9 wt% throughout the 
formulation process. In comparison to the PCM, the NePCM exhibited 
significantly better thermal performance on the test. The maximum 
power output showed the greatest increase for NePCM, which was re -
ported at 44.74 %, 46.63 %, and 48.23 % after being exposed to inso -
lation intensities of 410, 530, and 690 W/m
2
, respectively. An 
experimental evaluation of a FPSC that utilised paraffin wax as a sus -
tainable phase-change material was carried out by Bharathiraja and 
colleagues [ 277 ].
For the purpose of conducting studies that involve hybrid nano -
particles, namely MWCNTs and SiO
2 
at different weight fractions, this 
study makes use of paraffin wax as the conducting matrix. The evalua -
tion of water heating was carried out over eight hours, beginning at 8:00 
AM and ending at 6:00 PM, using a tank that held 100 L of water. In 
comparison to the situation in which NePCM was not present, the 
implementation of NePCM in a f FPSC resulted in improved thermal 
performance as well as a marginal gain in thermal efficiency of roughly 7 
%. With NePCM, the highest water temperature to be measured at the 
discharge was 70 
◦
C. It is now clear that the technology of incorporating 
nanoparticles into PCMs enhances the charging and discharging per -
formance of latent heat storage units, which enhances the thermal per -
formance and thermal management of applications, with different 
enhancement rates depending on several factors, including the type of 
thermal application, configurations, type of PCM, nanoparticles, 
ambient conditions, heat transfer area, etc.
6.2. Energy: recent AI developments in energy optimization
AI can greatly enhance energy efficiency by optimizing operations, 
improving energy forecasting, and enhancing control strategies. AI can 
use advanced algorithms to analyse complex data patterns, optimize 
energy storage and release processes, and adapt thermal system pa -
rameters in real-time. It also accurately predicts energy demand and 
enables real-time monitoring and adaptive control, ultimately 
enhancing the efficiency and reliability of the power system. For the 
purpose of predicting the performance parameters of desiccant-coated 
heat exchangers, Priyadarshi et al. [ 278 ] make use of ANFISs that are 
equipped with ANN. These heat exchangers have been constructed to 
make use of the fuzzy logic of ANN. Through the use of adaptive neuro- 
fuzzy and ANN, it was demonstrated that the proper design/inlet con -
dition for the theoretical and design operating ranges was established.
When Abdul Hussein and Shbailat [ 279 ] conducted an experimental 
and numerical investigation, they used an ANN to estimate the thermal 
performance of a counter-flow double-tube heat exchanger that utilised 
bumpers to increase thermal performance. Also, they found that the 
thermal performance parameters of the building were precisely antici -
pated, which meant that they agreed with the results of the experimental 
tests. The bumpers are positioned between 130 and 190 cm away from 
the heat exchanger, which results in the best thermal performance 
possible. In their study [ 280 ], Askar and colleagues used ANNs to make 
predictions about the cooling and heating load of a building. Addition -
ally, they presented the thermal performance of a four-layer wall in four 
distinct directions. As shown in Fig. 10 below, they decided to use MLP 
and radial basis networks in their neural network models. These net -
works were equipped with three different methods. Scaled conjugate 
gradient, Levenberg-Marquardt, and RBF are the three concepts. In 
addition, they created the data on 624 different configurations by uti -
lizing six different building shapes, four different directions, five 
different glass areas, and five different glass distribution methods. Ac -
cording to their findings, the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm provided 
the highest accuracy compared to experimental data. Also, it stated that 
for controlling the light and air, the window placement should be east 
and south with 20 % window area, and the position of the south-facing 
window will provide the nearest average heating and cooling loads.
For this study, Issa et al. [ 281 ] generated 432 models of three types of 
walls, light, medium, and heavy, which were made from different ma -
terials and thicknesses with the help of HAP software; the direction and 
colour of the wall from the outside were also taken into consideration. 
To predict the wall type that permits minimal external heat gains in hot 
climates, the data was used to train and test the ANN, whose architecture 
is illustrated in Fig. 11 . A transient thermal analysis by Ansys was also 
applied to ensure the results ’ validity. For the optimal wall, the heat gain 
was 9.548, 9.598, and 9.62 W/m
2 
for ANN, HAP, and Ansys, respec -
tively, further validating the results.
Khan et al. [ 282 ] introduce a paper discussing the enhancement of 
the building heat load prediction through the methods considering the 
challenges of applying sophisticated control measures and AI integration 
to the air conditioning systems. The study presented an intelligent model 
of the predictive ANFIS, which gave a very high level of accurate pre -
diction of HVAC performance outcomes and contributed to the genera -
tion of a holistic dataset. Ventilation depends on the weather parameters 
that affect convection, and they proposed the best set of weather con -
ditions to be used: the wind speed of 5 km/h, relative humidity of 45 %, 
and the dry air temperature of 13 
◦
C. The authors of a study by Rocha 
et al. [ 283 ] came up with a solution to the problem of energy planning in 
buildings by introducing the idea of structures that have a net energy 
cost that is zero. This is accomplished with the assistance of AI tactics, 
which include decision trees, binary gravity search algorithms, and 
bidirectional long short-term memories, among others.
Wind and photovoltaic (PV) renewable energies, an automatic 
capacitor bank to rectify the power factor, and a battery bank are the 
components that together make up the system, which is based on a 
genuine public building. It was determined that the distributed gener -
ating system had an output of 2.805 GWH per year, which was based on 
the fact that the building had an annual energy consumption of 1.748 
GWH. The fact that the system is able to successfully cover about 160.5 
% of the depot ’ s electricity demands and 99.999 % of the energy costs 
that are incurred during the year is evidence that the idea of zero net 
energy is in existence. A payback period of 6.79 years was likewise 
proven by the system. Cox et al. [ 284 ] presented an integrated ANN and 
GA system to operate as a control system to lower operating costs in a 
Fig. 9. Schematic diagram of the experimental rig [ 276 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
25 
--- PAGE 26 ---
Fig. 10. Schematic diagram to predict cooling and heating loads by ANN [ 280 ].
Fig. 11. Structure of ANN model used in [ 281 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
26 
--- PAGE 27 ---
district cooling system with ice storage. This system would take into 
consideration a variety of pricing situations. Other studies focused on 
other energetic and thermal applications with the same objective. 
Normalized mean bias error and RMSE were two of the metrics utilised 
in evaluating the model.
When attempting to forecast heat loads, various weather character -
istics, such as the temperature of the dry bulb and the relative humidity, 
were gathered and compared with this information. The ANN-GA model 
attained a normalized mean bias error of 13.2 % and a cumulative 
variation of RMSE of 18.0 % on average. To forecast the amount of heat, 
load a vehicle will experience over a whole year, Askar et al. [ 285 ] 
created an ANNs model. Based on theoretical data, the ANN was trained 
to consider the heat generated in the cabin by passengers, sun radiation, 
the engine, ventilation, ambient, and exhaust environments. A 
maximum inaccuracy of 3 %, 5 %, and 11 % was found between the 
theoretically estimated heat load and the ANN for August, December, 
and September, respectively, according to the findings of their investi -
gation. An ANN was used by Eldokaish et al. [ 286 ] in a PCM material to 
predict the phase transition length of encapsulated paraffin wax. The 
variables include volume percentages of manganese monoxide and sil -
ver nanoparticles, Hartmann numbers, and different strengths of radi -
ally dispersed magnetic fields. The training, testing, and validation sets ’ 
respective MSE values of 1.311, 1.628, and 2.329 demonstrate the 
noteworthy success that was attained.
Cui et al. [ 287 ] used an ANN to forecast and assess power output in a 
nanofluid/PCM photovoltaic TES. The solar panel temperature, global 
temperature, ambient temperature, and solar radiation were included in 
the input parameters, and the system produced the voltage, current, and 
power outputs. The ANN displayed excellent prediction performance, as 
shown in Fig. 12 .
Leng et al. [ 288 ] used a genetic algorithm-based hybrid virus colony 
search on a water storage tank to evaluate best scheduling practices for a 
hybrid power system incorporating a combined cooling, heating, and 
power. Their results indicated a summertime performance gain of 1.93 
% overall and 1.92 % compared to other approaches. Lee et al. [ 289 ] 
utilised an ANN that was optimized by metaheuristics on a sensible 
chiller tank for latent heat thermal storage. In addition to lowering 
operational expenses by 9.1 – 14.6 %, they demonstrated an outstanding 
capacity to control load levels in a customisable manner. In order to 
forecast the phase transition process of PCM within a multi-channel 
thermal storage tank, Xiao et al. [ 290 ] developed a short-term mem -
ory (LSTM)-BP ANN. The temperature, the amount of time, and the 
velocity of the heat transfer fluid from the inlet are the most important 
characteristics that this ANNs takes into consideration. The findings 
indicate remarkable accuracy for the proposed model, achieving R- 
values of 0.99978 for the fluid ratio and 0.99921 for temperature. In 
order to detect the presence of a leak and the location of any leak in a 
water testing platform, Mahdi et al. [ 291 ] constructed an ANN model.
The parameters, neurons, and hidden layers of this model were 
optimized during the process. In this particular instance, the data from 
the accelerometers and dynamic pressure sensors that were collected in 
the time domain were processed into higher levels of statistics, such as 
the autocorrelation coefficient and signal energy. They were able to 
achieve maximum accuracies and F1 scores of 86.5 % and 86.2 %, 
respectively, with their method, which enables reasonably reliable leak 
identification and localisation across a variety of situations using their 
method. The results of this study highlight the potential for water 
management systems to incorporate such advanced features and com -
binations of AI. Predictive control models, especially those based on 
ANN, show effective control capabilities and provide promising and 
concrete solutions that are difficult to implement by conventional 
experimental and numerical methods.
Fig. 12. Verifying the average predictive Nusselt number in case (a) training, (b) testing, and (c) overall datasets [ 287 ].
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
27 
--- PAGE 28 ---
6.3. Case studies: successful applications of AI and nanotechnology
This section explores some case studies of AI and nanotechnology in 
improving application performance, highlighting successful imple -
mentations, lessons learned, best practices, and measurable benefits. 
Siemens has created an AI-driven energy management system designed 
for buildings that enhances the efficiency of HVAC systems by consid -
ering occupancy trends and weather conditions. This system has been 
implemented in various buildings, leading to notable energy savings. In 
its data centres, Google utilised AI to improve cooling systems. By 
evaluating sensor information and weather predictions, the AI cut 
cooling energy use by as much as 40 %. Similarly, Microsoft has adopted 
AI technology in its data centres to optimize energy consumption. By 
accessing data from sensors and weather forecasts, AI algorithms modify 
cooling and power usage, reducing energy consumption while ensuring 
performance remains intact. The quality of data sourced from sensors 
and other inputs is vital for optimizing performance through AI. Inte -
grating data from diverse sources and verifying its accuracy and 
dependability [ 292 ]. Moreover, energy performance driven by AI can 
positively influence the environment by decreasing greenhouse gas 
emissions and other pollutants linked to energy production [ 293 ].
Nanotechnology has achieved remarkable success in various thermal 
applications; for example, in a double-pipe heat exchanger, Kadhim 
et al. [ 294 ] improved its thermal performance by using Fe
3
O
4
-water 
nanofluid as a heat transfer fluid instead of water, where the Nusselt 
number increased by 13 %, which means that the size of the heat 
exchanger can be reduced to achieve the same required performance. 
The hybrid MgO-CuO-water nanofluid was able to increase the average 
thermal efficiency of a heat pipe evacuated solar water collector by 
about 20 % compared to using pure water, as reported by Aytaç et al. 
[ 295 ], which led to economic improvements and reduced the recovery 
period by about 27 %. Razzaq et al. [ 296 ] incorporated TiO
2 
nano -
particles with mineral oil lubricant at different ratios to improve the 
performance of an air conditioner compressor. They found that lubri -
cants containing 0.4 % TiO
2 
nanoparticles had lower energy destruction 
and power consumption, which improved the system economically as 
well as provided environmental benefits. Abdullah et al. [ 297 ] coated a 
solar still with black-enhanced CuO nanoparticles to enhance the heat 
transfer properties between the basin surfaces and the water. Their re -
sults indicated a 14 % improvement in freshwater productivity with the 
coating. In the same study, they also mixed these nanoparticles with 
PCM to further enhance the performance of the solar still, and indeed, 
the productivity increased by 108 %. The various studies chosen in 
distinct thermal applications offer a significant understanding of the 
extensive advantages provided by nanotechnology and AI. These tech -
nologies can contribute to cost savings for organizations by minimizing 
energy usage. Among the financial advantages of AI-driven applications 
are decreased energy expenses and lower maintenance costs.
Beyond theoretical advances, commercial viability is a decisive fac -
tor in the successful adoption of AI- and nanotechnology-based TESs. 
Several industrial-scale implementations provide encouraging evidence. 
For instance, a pilot project by the Fraunhofer Institute in Germany 
combined nano-enhanced PCMs with predictive AI control to manage 
building HVAC systems in a smart campus setting. Over a 12-month 
deployment, the system demonstrated a 28 % reduction in energy con -
sumption and a 21 % improvement in occupant comfort, with a return 
on investment (ROI) of under 3 years. Similarly, Tesla ’ s Gigafactory in 
Nevada integrates AI-optimized thermal management for its battery 
production line using AI algorithms trained on both ambient and oper -
ational data. The system enables dynamic control overheat exchangers 
and coolant flows, contributing to energy savings of up to 15 % 
annually.
The design and implementation of a multi-physics simulation envi -
ronment to explore the synergistic design of AI and nanofluid-based 
thermal systems was done in a recent theoretical study by Mohib Hus -
sain et al. (2025) [ 298 ]. The researchers used a computational fluid 
dynamics (CFD) model with ML-based surrogate modelling to forecast 
and optimize the thermal performance of a nanofluid-cooled FPSC at 
different operating conditions. The nanofluid was a hybrid Al
2
O
3
-Cu 
/water mixture with different volume fractions of 0 % to 2 %. Its authors 
have created a set of CFD simulations, which span a variety of Reynolds 
numbers, solar intensities, and concentrations of nanoparticles. The CFD 
results were then used to train an ANN to match the CFD results closely. 
ANN gave a MAPE of less than 2.5, which shows very good correlation 
with the numerical model. As it was discovered in the study, the thermal 
efficiency increased by 17.6 % against conventional water, with the 
optimum concentration of nanoparticle at 1.2 %. In addition, the 
computational cost was reduced considerably as the optimization pro -
cess took place more than 85 % faster via the trained AI model. These 
findings demonstrate the potential of AI to supersede theoretical 
modelling to facilitate faster parametric studies and improve the dy -
namic process of designing high-performance thermal systems. It also 
demonstrates a convenient approach to hybrid AI-CFD modelling, which 
may also be used in future studies in which nanotechnology is applied in 
the field of heat transfer.
However, these deployments also revealed practical constraints that 
must be considered in future commercial analyses. Challenges include 
the high upfront costs of nanomaterial integration, the need for 
specialized hardware for AI computation, and regulatory barriers in 
energy infrastructure upgrades. Additionally, while AI models offer su -
perior performance in data-rich environments, their efficacy may 
degrade in data-scarce or unstable deployment contexts. Thus, future 
commercial strategies should not only rely on performance metrics but 
also consider lifecycle cost analysis, scalability under variable climate 
zones, and long-term reliability. Including such real-world feedback 
loops into system design and investment planning is essential for tran -
sitioning from experimental validation to widespread industrial 
adoption.
6.4. Future trends in research and development
Edge AI is an emerging trend along with IoT, highlighted as AIoT, 
proposing an improved energy efficiency performance in various sectors 
like buildings, industrial applications, and operational performance in 
transportation networks. The AI algorithms are being used to analyse 
real-time data about energy consumption to minimize wastage and bring 
down operational costs. However, as AI and nanotechnology merge into 
thermodynamics, sustainability and environmental impacts must be 
taken up comprehensively. Future work should prioritize the subsequent 
components: 
• Life Cycle Assessment: Life cycle assessment of nanomaterials 
deployed within TESs is important for assessing their environmental 
impact from cradle-to-grave scenarios. LCA can provide insight into 
resource consumption, energy use, and emissions related to the use 
of nanomaterials, elucidating against possible environmental trade- 
offs and benefits.
• Sustainable Material Development: Research should also include 
the development of sustainable nanomaterials that reduces adverse 
environmental impacts. This includes efforts to explore biodegrad -
able or less toxic alternatives to conventional nanoparticles, along 
with the search for greener synthesis processes that lower energy use 
and waste production.
• Integration of Sustainability Metrics: Henceforth, AI models 
should integrate sustainability metrics in their optimization algo -
rithms. While AI works toward the design of more sustainable TESs, 
parallel to the global sustainability goals, it would do so by assessing 
environmental impacts along with performance metrics.
• Regulatory Frameworks: Increased use of nanotechnology in en -
ergy systems would call for the establishment of a clear regulatory 
framework. These studies should assist in framing environment 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
28 
--- PAGE 29 ---
health-related policy measures for safe and sustainable utilization of 
nanomaterials.
• Standardized Testing Protocols: Future research ought to be can -
tered on the development of standardized means of testing and 
criteria of performance threshold of the nanomaterial-based 
enhanced thermal systems. This would make it reproducible, cross- 
comparable and would allow the adoption of nanotechnology in 
energy systems at industrial scales.
• AIs Training Datasets: Datasets that can be used to train ML models 
in thermal energy better are severely lacking, particularly publicly 
accessible, topic-specific datasets. Open data would foster bench -
marking ability, accountability, and a fair performance assessment of 
different competing AI algorithms.
In addressing these issues through a critical stance, future research 
can underpin claims of sustainable advancement in the converged do -
mains of nanotechnology and AI in thermal applications. This will make 
a case for technologies whose energy efficiency is counterpoised with 
environmental sustainability and public health.
7. Challenges and future directions
There are some challenges and issues regarding the use of nano -
technology that must be addressed, which can be summarized as 
follows: 
• Additional research is required to investigate the environmental ef -
fects of environmental particles, with a particular emphasis on the 
disposal of discarded nanomaterials and any potential long-term 
repercussions.
• Serious consideration must be given to the cost of manufacturing 
nanoparticles and the application of these particles on an industrial 
scale.
• When it comes to nanofluids, the high-pressure drop that is linked 
with nanofluid flow is a significant cause for concern. However, 
while utilizing nanoparticles, it is necessary to take into consider -
ation their viscosity. There is also a significant worry regarding the 
stability of nanofluids over lengthy periods of operation. Nano -
particles can aggregate, which can result in contamination of 
equipment and a decrease in the efficiency of heat transfer.
• Using nanoparticles to improve thermal conductivity in latent ther -
mal storage materials may cause issues such as inhomogeneous 
temperature distribution during charging and discharging. Further 
research is needed to address these issues.
When it comes to AI, it is confronted with a variety of significant 
issues, some of which are technological in character, such as those in the 
energy industry; others are industrial and regulatory; and still others are 
related to user awareness [ 299 ]. The following is a list of the numerous 
difficulties that still need to be addressed by the application of AI: 
• Absence of adequate finances: For AI technology to assimilate more 
widely and deeply into the energy system, we require a bundle of AI 
workers who wield appropriate technology to instigate this change, 
but this is wanting the change in the AI-led energy market. 
Furthermore, this technological deployment in the energy market 
includes the creation, optimization, and operation of heavily 
resource- and financially intensive programs. A consistent shortage 
of developed financial expertise is one of the most pressing chal -
lenges for integrating intelligent energy system development.
• Smart integration: One of the key challenges in deploying smart 
production technology involves integrating old and new equipment. 
Also, some consider old equipment unwieldy, while others see it as 
more of a challenge than an opportunity.
• Smart manufacturing security issues: The smart manufacturing process 
uses a network system that interlinks production units and a 
manufacturing unit to various end users in an industrial context. So 
that networking systems such as smart production processes can be 
developed securely.
• Implementation of AI: Like with all technologies, the biggest challenge 
that stakeholders and energy companies face is adapting to AI, which 
will take time, dollars, and effort.
• Computing strength: The continuous development of algorithms with 
AI requires advanced computers in terms of cores and graphics 
processors to work with the required performance. Therefore, you 
need computing strength that meets the requirements, and these 
super-computers are not cheap.
• Data Protection: Data protection has become one of the major chal -
lenges of the century, and with the continuous development of AI, 
data protection has become a natural challenge for AI, especially in 
the field of energy to all cyber-attacks.
Future research in AI for thermal application performance optimi -
zation should involve interdisciplinary collaboration between AI re -
searchers, thermal energy experts, policymakers, and industry 
stakeholders. This collaboration can lead to innovative solutions and 
best practices. Data sharing and standardization are crucial for the 
success of AI in process optimization. Also, the potential of integrating 
nanotechnology and AI into thermal applications is yielding amazing 
results that open up new societal horizons.
Future research should also address the practical integration chal -
lenges between AI models and physical thermal systems, such as sensor 
drift, latency, and hardware compatibility, which can impair real-time 
control and system stability. Developing standardized validation pro -
tocols (spanning both simulation and experimental data) is essential to 
ensure reproducibility and cross-study comparability. Moreover, the use 
of AI-driven material discovery frameworks, including RL and inverse 
design, holds strong potential for optimizing nanoparticle properties and 
accelerating the development of high-performance, sustainable 
nanomaterials.
8. Conclusion
This review illustrates that integrating nanotechnology and AI may 
significantly enhance TESs ’ performance, efficiency, and sustainability. 
Nanotechnology, with advancements in nano-enhanced materials such 
as PCMs and nanofluids, tackles significant issues in thermal conduc -
tivity and energy storage, improving system efficiency in applications 
including solar collectors and energy storage systems. These materials 
enhance thermal management by expediting heat transfer rates and 
augmenting energy storage capacity, demonstrating particular signifi -
cance in renewable energy systems where efficiency and dependability 
are paramount. Conversely, AI enhances these systems via predictive 
maintenance, real-time performance monitoring, and energy fore -
casting. Algorithms like ANNs and optimization methods provide 
intelligent control, reducing energy losses and enhancing operational 
stability.
Notwithstanding these achievements, concerns remain regarding 
economic viability, material expenses, and the environmental sustain -
ability of nanomaterials. Future research should emphasize the creation 
of economical, eco-friendly materials and the enhancement of sophis -
ticated AI algorithms capable of adapting to the intricacies of TESs.
Furthermore, enhancing AI skills to augment the scalability and 
integration of thermal systems inside extensive energy networks is 
crucial for wider deployment. Integrating nanotechnology with AI is a 
viable avenue for developing efficient, robust, and sustainable thermal 
energy solutions. This convergence facilitates the shift to renewable 
energy sources and corresponds with global energy sustainability ob -
jectives, representing a substantial advancement in the evolution of 
optimized intelligent energy systems.
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
29 
--- PAGE 30 ---
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hayder I. Mohammed: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptu -
alization. Farhan Lafta Rashid: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptu -
alization. Hussein Togun: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. 
Ephraim Bonah Agyekum: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptu -
alization. Arman Ameen: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, 
Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis. Karrar A. 
Hammoodi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Rujda 
Parveen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visuali -
zation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Saif Ali 
Kadhim: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visuali -
zation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Walaa N. 
Abbas: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualiza -
tion, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Funding
This article received no external funding.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] Ali HM, et al. Advances in thermal energy storage: fundamentals and 
applications. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2024;100:101109 .
[2] Ebrahimnataj Tiji M, et al. Evaluation of T-shaped fins with a novel layout for 
improved melting in a triple-tube heat storage system. Frontiers in Energy 
Research 2022:10 .
[3] Sharma P, et al. Recent advances in machine learning research for Nanofluid- 
based heat transfer in renewable energy system. Energy Fuel 2022;36(13): 
6626–58 .
[4] Sadeghzadeh M, et al. Smart modeling by using artificial intelligent techniques on 
thermal performance of flat-plate solar collector using nanofluid. Energy Sci Eng 
2019;7(5):1649–58 .
[5] Tawalbeh M, et al. A comprehensive review on the recent advances in materials 
for thermal energy storage applications. International Journal of Thermofluids 
2023;18:100326 .
[6] Liu L, et al. Comprehensive analysis and optimization of combined cooling 
heating and power system integrated with solar thermal energy and thermal 
energy storage. Energy Convers Manag 2023;275:116464 .
[7] Zhu Q, et al. Recent advances in graphene-based phase change composites for 
thermal energy storage and management. Nano Materials Science 2024;6(2): 
115–38 .
[8] Algarni S. Evaluation and optimization of the performance and efficiency of a 
hybrid flat plate solar collector integrated with phase change material and heat 
sink. Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 2023;45:102892 .
[9] NematpourKeshteli A, et al. Increasing melting and solidification performances of 
a phase change material-based flat plate solar collector equipped with metal 
foams, nanoparticles, and wavy wall-Y-shaped surface. Energy Convers Manag 
2023;291:117268 .
[10] Rashid FL, et al. Corrigendum to “Analysis of heat transfer in various cavity 
geometries with and without nano-enhanced phase change material: A review” 
[Energy Rep. 10 (2023) 3757–3779]. Energy Rep 2024;(11):249 .
[11] Tiwari AK, Ghosh P, Sarkar J. Solar water heating using nanofluids–a 
comprehensive overview and environmental impact analysis. International 
Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 2013;3(3):221–4 .
[12] Al-Obaidi MA, et al. Recent achievements in heat transfer enhancement with 
hybrid Nanofluid in heat exchangers: A comprehensive review. Int J Thermophys 
2024;45(9):133 .
[13] Rashid FL, et al. Recent advances and developments of the application of hybrid 
nanofluids in parabolic solar collector energy systems and guidelines for future 
prospects. J Eng Res 2024:1–20 .
[14] Boujelbene M, et al. Melting performance of nano-enhanced phase change 
materials in a triple-tube heat exchanger with zigzag-shaped tubes. J Energy 
Storage 2023;67:107484 .
[15] Rahman MA, et al. Pioneering heat transfer enhancements in latent thermal 
energy storage: passive and active strategies unveiled. Heliyon 2024;10(19): 
e37981 .
[16] Woo HY, et al. Passive daytime radiative cooling with thermal energy storage 
using phase change n-octadecane/SiO2 nanobeads. Opt Mater 2023;139:113812 .
[17] Ju Y, et al. Evaluation of multiple semi-twisted tape inserts in a heat exchanger 
pipe using Al2O3 Nanofluid. Nanomaterials 2021;11(6):1570 .
[18] Eisapour M, et al. Solidification of a nano-enhanced phase change material 
(NePCM) in a double elliptical latent heat storage unit with wavy inner tubes. Sol 
Energy 2022;241:39–53 .
[19] V, M.G. and R.S. D. A comprehensive investigation and artificial neural network 
modeling of shape stabilized composite phase change material for solar thermal 
energy storage. J Energy Storage 2022;48:103992 .
[20] Khan F, Karimi MN, Khan O. Exploring the scalability and commercial viability of 
biosynthesized nanoparticles for cooling panels with the help of artificial 
intelligence and solar energy systems. Green Technologies and Sustainability 
2023;1(3):100036 .
[21] Kalidasan B, et al. Nano additive enhanced salt hydrate phase change materials 
for thermal energy storage. Int Mater Rev 2023;68(2):140–83 .
[22] Yousefi T, et al. An experimental investigation on the effect of Al2O3–H2O 
nanofluid on the efficiency of flat-plate solar collectors. Renew Energy 2012;39 
(1):293–8 .
[23] Olabi AG, et al. Application of artificial intelligence for prediction, optimization, 
and control of thermal energy storage systems. Thermal Science and Engineering 
Progress 2023;39:101730 .
[24] Kalani H, Sardarabadi M, Passandideh-Fard M. Using artificial neural network 
models and particle swarm optimization for manner prediction of a photovoltaic 
thermal nanofluid based collector. Appl Therm Eng 2017;113:1170–7 .
[25] Al-Waeli AHA, et al. Comparison of prediction methods of PV/T nanofluid and 
nano-PCM system using a measured dataset and artificial neural network. Sol 
Energy 2018;162:378–96 .
[26] Ukoba Kingsley, et al. Optimizing renewable energy systems through artificial 
intelligence: review and future prospects. Energy & Environment 2024;35(7): 
3833–79 .
[27] Amiri AF, Kichou S, Oudira H, Chouder A, Silvestre S. Fault detection and 
diagnosis of a photovoltaic system based on deep learning using the combination 
of a convolutional neural network (CNN) and bidirectional gated recurrent unit 
(bi-GRU). Sustainability 2024;16. https://doi.org/10.3390/su16031012.
[28] Guelpa E, Verda V. Thermal energy storage in district heating and cooling 
systems: A review. Appl Energy 2019;252:113474 .
[29] Tarragona J, et al. Systematic review on model predictive control strategies 
applied to active thermal energy storage systems. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2021; 
149:111385 .
[30] Akhmetov B, et al. Thermal energy storage systems–review. Bulg Chem Commun 
2016;48:31–40 .
[31] Tiji ME, et al. Thermal Management of the Melting Process in a latent heat triplex 
tube storage system using different configurations of frustum tubes. J Nanomater 
2022;2022(1):7398110 .
[32] Sardari P, Mohammed H, Giddings D, walker, GS, Gillott, M., and Grant, D.. 
Numerical study of a multiple-segment metal foam-PCM latent heat storage unit: 
effect of porosity, pore density and location of heat source. Energy 2019;189 
(116108):10.1016 .
[33] He Z, Guo W, Zhang P. Performance prediction, optimal design and operational 
control of thermal energy storage using artificial intelligence methods. Renew 
Sust Energ Rev 2022;156:111977 .
[34] Ben Khedher N, et al. Discharge performance assessment of a vertical double-pipe 
latent heat storage unit equipped with circular Y-shaped fins. Journal of Building 
Engineering 2023;75:106870 .
[35] Vassiliades C, et al. Building integration of active solar energy systems: A review 
of geometrical and architectural characteristics. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2022;164: 
112482 .
[36] Navarro L, et al. Thermal energy storage in building integrated thermal systems: 
A review. Part 2. Integration as passive system. Renew Energy 2016;85:1334–56 .
[37] Romdhane SB, et al. A review on thermal energy storage using phase change 
materials in passive building applications. Journal of Building Engineering 2020; 
32:101563 .
[38] Bastien D, Athienitis AK. Passive thermal energy storage, part 1: design concepts 
and metrics. Renew Energy 2018;115:1319–27 .
[39] Gupta N, Tiwari GN. Review of passive heating/cooling systems of buildings. 
Energy Sci Eng 2016;4(5):305–33 .
[40] Faraj K, et al. Phase change material thermal energy storage systems for cooling 
applications in buildings: A review. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2020;119:109579 .
[41] Jomehzadeh F, et al. A review on windcatcher for passive cooling and natural 
ventilation in buildings, part 1: indoor air quality and thermal comfort 
assessment. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2017;70:736–56 .
[42] Gilvaei ZM, Poshtiri AH, Akbarpoor AM. A novel passive system for providing 
natural ventilation and passive cooling: evaluating thermal comfort and building 
energy. Renew Energy 2022;198:463–83 .
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
30 
--- PAGE 31 ---
[43] Beyne W, et al. Standardised methods for the determination of key performance 
indicators for thermal energy storage heat exchangers. Renew Sust Energ Rev 
2023;176:113139 .
[44] Palomba V, Frazzica A. Comparative analysis of thermal energy storage 
technologies through the definition of suitable key performance indicators. Energ 
Buildings 2019;185:88 – 102 .
[45] Abed AM, et al. Numerical analysis of the energy-storage performance of a PCM- 
based triplex-tube containment system equipped with arc-shaped fins. Frontiers 
in Chemistry 2022:10 .
[46] Aghemo L, et al. Comparison of key performance indicators of sorbent materials 
for thermal energy storage with an economic focus. Energy Storage Mater 2023; 
55:130 – 53 .
[47] Bahlekeh A, et al. Evaluation of the solidification process in a double-tube latent 
heat storage unit equipped with circular fins with optimum fin spacing. Energy 
Sci Eng 2023;11(7):2552 – 70 .
[48] Shojaeinasab Chatroudi I, et al. Heat transfer enhancement and free convection 
assessment in a double-tube latent heat storage unit equipped with optimally 
spaced circular fins: evaluation of the melting process. Frontiers in Energy 
Research 2023:11 .
[49] Bandaru SH, et al. A review of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) technology for 
residential applications: performance indicators, progress, and opportunities. 
Energies 2021;14(13):3853 .
[50] Gonz ´alez-Gil A, Palacin R, Batty P. Optimal energy management of urban rail 
systems: key performance indicators. Energy Convers Manag 2015;90:282 – 91 .
[51] Khedher NB, et al. Comprehensive analysis of melting enhancement by circular Y- 
shaped fins in a vertical shell-and-tube heat storage system. Engineering 
Applications of Computational Fluid Mechanics 2023;17(1):2227682 .
[52] Lou W, et al. A review on the performance indicators and influencing factors for 
the thermocline thermal energy storage systems. Energies 2021;14(24):8384 .
[53] Sultan HS, et al. Revolutionizing the latent heat storage: boosting discharge 
performance with innovative undulated phase change material containers in a 
vertical shell-and-tube system. Journal of Computational Design and Engineering 
2024;11(2):122 – 45 .
[54] Soares N, et al. Review of passive PCM latent heat thermal energy storage systems 
towards buildings ’ energy efficiency. Energ Buildings 2013;59:82 – 103 .
[55] Merabet GH, et al. Intelligent building control systems for thermal comfort and 
energy-efficiency: A systematic review of artificial intelligence-assisted 
techniques. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2021;144:110969 .
[56] Wu S-Y, et al. Convection heat loss from cavity receiver in parabolic dish solar 
thermal power system: A review. Sol Energy 2010;84(8):1342 – 55 .
[57] Connolly D, et al. A review of computer tools for analysing the integration of 
renewable energy into various energy systems. Appl Energy 2010;87(4):1059 – 82 .
[58] Benaissa M, et al. Maximizing thermal response in latent heat thermal energy 
storage systems: A comprehensive study of wavy fin configuration and 
distribution. International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer 2024;159: 
108172 .
[59] Fumey B, Weber R, Baldini L. Sorption based long-term thermal energy 
storage – process classification and analysis of performance limitations: A review. 
Renew Sust Energ Rev 2019;111:57 – 74 .
[60] Alnaimat F, Rashid Y. Thermal energy storage in solar power plants: A review of 
the materials, associated limitations, and proposed solutions. Energies 2019;12 
(21):4164 .
[61] Walser T, Limbach LK, Brogioli R, Erismann E, Flamigni L, Hattendorf B, et al. 
Persistence of engineered nanoparticles in a municipal solid-waste incineration 
plant. Nat Nanotechnol 2012;7:520 – 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2012.64 .
[62] Kaegi R, Voegelin A, Sinnet B, Zuleeg S, Hagendorfer H, Burkhardt M, et al. 
Behavior of metallic silver nanoparticles in a pilot wastewater treatment plant. 
Environ Sci Technol 2011;45:3902 – 8. https://doi.org/10.1021/es1041892 .
[63] Lodha AS, Pandya A, Shukla RK. Nanotechnology: an applied and robust 
approach for forensic investigation. Forens Res Criminol Int J 2016;2(1):00044 .
[64] Khan I, Saeed K, Khan I. Nanoparticles: properties, applications and toxicities. 
Arab J Chem 2019;12(7):908 – 31 .
[65] Rahman M, Hosur M, Zainuddin S, Vaidya U, Tauhid A, Kumar A, et al. Effects of 
amino-functionalized MWCNTs on ballistic impact performance of E-glass/epoxy 
composites using a spherical projectile. Int J Impact Eng 2013;57:108e18 .
[66] Domun N, Kaboglu C, Paton KR, Dear JP, Liu J, Blackman BRK, et al. Ballistic 
impact behaviour of glass fibre reinforced polymer composite with 1D/2D 
nanomodified epoxy matrices. Compos B Eng 2019;167:497 – 506 .
[67] Gehrke I, Geiser A, Somborn-Schulz A. Innovations in nanotechnology for water 
treatment. Nanotechnol Sci Appl 2015;8:1 .
[68] Jampílek J, Kr ´a ľ ov ´a K. Application of nanotechnology in agriculture and food 
industry, its prospects and risks. Ecol Chem Eng S 2015;22(3):321 – 61 .
[69] Sharma V. Nanotechnology and its applications in energy sector. Int J Technol 
2016;6(2):87 – 92 .
[70] Mathew J, Joy J, George SC. Potential applications of nanotechnology in 
transportation: A review. J King Saud Univ-Sci 2019;31(4):586 – 94 .
[71] Yeh N-C. Nanotechnology for electronics & photonics. Technovation 2013;33 
(4 – 5):108 .
[72] Anjum S, et al. Emerging applications of nanotechnology in healthcare systems: 
grand challenges and perspectives. Pharmaceuticals 2021;14(8):707 .
[73] Tripathi S, et al. Nano-bioremediation: anotechnology and bioremediation, in: 
Research Anthology on Emerging Techniques in Environmental Remediation. IGI 
Global 2022:135 – 49 .
[74] Dua K, et al. Nanotechnology: advancing the translational respiratory research. 
Interv Med Appl Sci 2017;9(1):39 – 41 .
[75] Zhou J, et al. Nanotechnology for virus treatment. Nano Today 2021;36:101031 .
[76] Tasoglu S, et al. Advances in nanotechnology and microfluidics for human 
papillomavirus diagnostics. Proc IEEE 2015;103(2):161 – 78 .
[77] Palestino G, et al. Can nanotechnology help in the fight against COVID-19? Expert 
Rev Anti-Infect Therapy 2020;18(9):849 – 64 .
[78] Tang Z, et al. Insights from nanotechnology in COVID-19 treatment. Nano Today 
2021;36:101019 .
[79] Fakoya MF, Shah SN. Emergence of nanotechnology in the oil and gas industry: 
emphasis on the application of silica nanoparticles. Petroleum 2017:391 – 405 .
[80] Taha TB, Barzinjy AA, Hussain FHS, Nurtayeva T. Nanotechnology and computer 
science: trends and advances. Memories - Materials, Devices, Circuits and Systems 
2022;2:100011 .
[81] Karjala DS. Protecting innovation in computer software, biotechnology, and 
nanotechnology. Va JL Tech 2011;16:42 .
[82] Shah Mudasir Akbar, Pirzada Bilal Masood, Price Gareth, Shibiru Abel L, 
Qurashi Ahsanulhaq. Applications of nanotechnology in smart textile industry: A 
critical review. J Adv Res 2022;38:55 – 75 .
[83] Ashfaq A, Khursheed N, Fatima S, Anjum Z, Younis K. Application of 
nanotechnology in food packaging: pros and cons. J Agric Food Res 2022;7: 
100270 .
[84] Gupta RK, Guha P, Srivastav PP. Natural polymers in bio-degradable/edible film: 
a review on environmental concerns, cold plasma technology and 
nanotechnology application on food packaging-A recent trends. Food Chem Adv 
2022;1:100135 .
[85] Packialakshmi JS, Kang J, Jayakumar A, Park S, Chang Y, Kim JT. Insights into 
the antibacterial and antiviral mechanisms of metal oxide nanoparticles used in 
food packaging. Food Packag Shelf Life 2023;40:101213 .
[86] Naseer B, Srivastava G, Qadri OS, Faridi SA, Islam RU, Younis K. Importance and 
health hazards of nanoparticles used in the food industry. Nanotechnol Rev 2018; 
7(6):623 – 41 .
[87] Hill E, Li J. Current and future prospects for nanotechnology in animal 
production. J Anim Sci Biotechnol 2017;8 .
[88] Jain N, H.. Gupta Nanomedicine: potential devices for diagnostics Recent Pat. 
Nanomed 2012;2:146 – 55 .
[89] Jard ´on-Maximino N, P. M, R. Sierra-
´
Avila, C. Avila-Orta, E. Jim ´enez Regalado, A. 
Bello, P. Gonz ´alez-Morones, G.. Cadenas-Pliego oxidation of copper nanoparticles 
protected with different coatings and stored under ambient conditions. 
J Nanomater 2018;2018:1 – 8 .
[90] Yeh YC, Creran B, V.M.. Rotello Gold nanoparticles: preparation, properties, and 
applications in bionanotechnology Nanoscale4; 2012. p. 1871 – 80 .
[91] Phan TTV, Huynh TC, Manivasagan P, Mondal S, Oh J. An up-to-date review on 
biomedical applications of palladium nanoparticles. Nanomaterials 2019;10 .
[92] Gunti L, Dass RS, N.K.. Kalagatur Phytofabrication of selenium nanoparticles from 
Emblica officinalis fruit extract and exploring its biopotential applications: 
antioxidant, antimicrobial, and biocompatibility. Front Microbiol 2019;10:931 .
[93] Synthesis of nanomaterials by high energy ball milling. http://www ; 2025. und 
erstandingnano.com/nanomaterial-synthesis-ball-milling.html (accessed 
30.12.16.
[94] Sol-gel. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sol-gel ; 2025. accessed 30.12.16.
[95] Bera D, Kuiry SC, Seal S. Synthesis of nanostructured materials using template- 
assisted electrodeposition. JOM 2004;56(1):49e53 .
[96] Shashurin A, Keidar M. Synthesis of 2D materials in arc plasmas. J Phys D Appl 
Phys 2015;48(31):314007 .
[97] Bubblers and Cylinders for CVD/ALD Precursor Handling, 2013. http:// www.azo 
nano.com/article.aspx?ArticleID ¼ 3423 (accessed 30.12.16).
[98] Wilson M, Kannangara K, Smith G, Simmons M, Raguse B. Nanotechnology. 
Florida: Chapman & Hall/CRC; 2002 .
[99] Said Z, Hachicha AA, Aberoumand S, Yousef BA, Sayed ET, Bellos E. Recent 
advances on nanofluids for low to medium temperature solar collectors: energy, 
exergy, economic analysis and environmental impact. Prog Energy Combust Sci 
2021;84:100898 .
[100] Amaral C, Vicente R, Marques P, Barros-Timmons A. Phase change materials and 
carbon nanostructures for thermal energy storage: a literature review. Renew Sust 
Energ Rev 2017;79:1212 – 28 .
[101] Fabiani C, Santini C, Barbanera M, Giannoni T, Rubino G, Cotana F, et al. Phase 
change materials-impregnated biomass for energy efficiency in buildings: 
innovative material production and multiscale thermophysical characterization. 
J Energy Storage 2023;58:106223 .
[102] Mishra RK, Verma K, Mishra V, Chaudhary B. A review on carbon-based phase 
change materials for thermal energy storage. J Energy Storage 2022;50:104166 .
[103] Hagelstein G, Gschwander S. Reduction of supercooling in paraffin phase change 
slurry by polyvinyl alcohol. Int J Refrig 2017;84:67 – 75 .
[104] Dixit P, Reddy VJ, Parvate S, Balwani A, Singh J, Maiti TK, et al. Salt hydrate 
phase change materials: current state of art and the road ahead. J Energy Storage 
2022;51:104360 .
[105] Rufuss DDW, Suganthi L, Iniyan S, Davies P. Effects of nanoparticle-enhanced 
phase change material (NPCM) on solar still productivity. J Clean Prod 2018;192: 
9 – 29 .
[106] Praveen B, Suresh S. Experimental study on heat transfer performance of 
neopentyl glycol/CuO composite solid-solid PCM in TES based heat sink. 
Engineering science and technology, an international journal 2018;21:1086 – 94 .
[107] Li C, Xie B, Chen J, He Z, Chen Z, Long Y. Emerging mineral-coupled composite 
phase change materials for thermal energy storage. Energy Convers Manag 2019; 
183:633 – 44 .
[108] Cao R, Chen S, Wang Y, Han N, Liu H, Zhang X. Functionalized carbon nanotubes 
as phase change materials with enhanced thermal, electrical conductivity, lightto- 
thermal, and electro-to-thermal performances. Carbon 2019;149:263 – 72 .
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
31 
--- PAGE 32 ---
[109] Jiang H, Li J, Xie Y, Du Y, Zhao J, Mei Y, et al. Rapid exfoliation and surface 
hydroxylation of high-quality boron nitride nanosheets enabling waterborne 
polyurethane with high thermal conductivity and flame retardancy. Adv Compos 
Hybrid Mater 2024;7:8 .
[110] Aslfattahi N, Saidur R, Arifutzzaman A, Sadri R, Bimbo N, Sabri MFM. et al. 
Experimental investigation of energy storage properties and thermal conductivity 
of a novel organic phase change material/MXene as A new class of 
nanocomposites. 2025 .
[111] Guo J, Liu Z, Du Z, Yu J, Yang X, Yan J. Effect of fin-metal foam structure on 
thermal energy storage: an experimental study. Renew Energy 2021;172:57 – 70 .
[112] Wu F, Lin Z, Xu T, Chen J, Huang G, Wu H, et al. Development and thermal 
properties of a novel sodium acetate trihydrate-Acetamide-micron/nano 
aluminum nitride composite phase change material. Mater Des 2020;196:109113 .
[113] Rostami S, Afrand M, Shahsavar A, Sheikholeslami M, Kalbasi R, Aghakhani S, 
et al. A review of melting and freezing processes of PCM/nano-PCM and their 
application in energy storage. Energy 2020;211:118698 .
[114] Wang J, Xie H, Guo Z, Guan L, Li Y. Improved thermal properties of paraffin wax 
by the addition of TiO2 nanoparticles. Appl Therm Eng 2014;73:1541 – 7 .
[115] Babapoor A, Karimi G. Thermal properties measurement and heat storage analysis 
of paraffinnanoparticles composites phase change material: comparison and 
optimization. Appl Therm Eng 2015;90:945 – 51 .
[116] He L, Wang H, Zhu H, Gu Y, Li X, Mao X. Thermal properties of PEG/graphene 
nanoplatelets (GnPs) composite phase change materials with enhanced thermal 
conductivity and photo-thermal performance. Appl Sci 2018;8:2613 .
[117] Saeed RM, Schlegel JP, Castano C, Sawafta R, Kuturu V. Preparation and thermal 
performance of methyl palmitate and lauric acid eutectic mixture as phase change 
material (PCM). J Energy Storage 2017;13:418 – 24 .
[118] Kumar R, Samykano M, Ngui W, Pandey A, Kalidasan B, Kadirgama K, et al. 
Investigation of thermal performance and chemical stability of graphene 
enhanced phase change material for thermal energy storage. Phys Chem Earth, 
Parts A/B/C 2022;128:103250 .
[119] Jacob J, Pandey A, Abd Rahim N, Selvaraj J, Paul J, Samykano M, et al. 
Quantifying thermophysical properties, characterization, and thermal cycle 
testing of nano-enhanced organic eutectic phase change materials for thermal 
energy storage applications. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 2022;248:112008 .
[120] Abdelrazik A, Al-Sulaiman F, Saidur R. Numerical investigation of the effects of 
the nano-enhanced phase change materials on the thermal and electrical 
performance of hybrid PV/thermal systems. Energy Convers Manag 2020;205: 
112449 .
[121] Shin D, Banerjee D. Enhanced specific heat of silica nanofluid. 2011 .
[122] K.V. Wong, O. De Leon, Applications of nanofluids: current and future, Adv Mech 
Eng 2 (0) (2010) 519659.
[123] Choi SU-S, Eastman JA. Enhancing thermal conductivity of fluids with 
nanoparticles. ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and 
Exposition 1995;231:99 – 105 .
[124] Kuznetsov GV, Sheremet MA. New approach to the mathe matical modeling of 
thermal regimes for electronic equipment. Rus sian Microelectronics 2008;37: 
131 – 8 .
[125] Kuznetsov GV, Sheremet MA. On the possibility of control ling thermal conditions 
of a typical element of electronic equipment with a local heat source via natural 
convection. Russian Microelec tronics 2010;39:427 – 42 .
[126] Kang HU, Kim SH, Oh JM. Estimation of thermal con ductivity of nanofluid using 
experimental effective particle volume. Experimental Heat Transfer 2006;19: 
181 – 91 .
[127] Wang XQ, Mujumdar AS. Heat transfer characteristics of nanofluids: a review. Int 
J Therm Sci 2007;46:1 – 19 .
[128] Kuznetsov AV, Nield DA. Natural convective boundary layer flow of a nanofluid 
past a vertical plate. Int J Therm Sci 2010;49:243 – 7 .
[129] Khanafer K, Vafai K. A critical synthesis of thermophysi cal characteristics of 
nanofluids. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2011;54:4410 – 28 .
[130] Das SK, Choi SUS, Yu W, Pradeep T. Nanofluids: Science and technology. New 
York: Wiley; 2007 .
[131] Rao Y. Nanofluids: stability, phase diagram, rheology and ap plications. 
Particuology 2010;8:549 – 55 .
[132] Gro ¸ san, T., Pop, I. Forced convection boundary layer flow past nonisothermal 
thin needles in nanofluids. ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 2011;133:054503 .
[133] Gro ¸ san, T., Pop, I. Fully developed mixed convection in a vertical channel filled 
by a nanofluid. ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 2012;134:082501 .
[134] Khanafer K, Vafai K, Lightstone M. Buoyancy-driven heat transfer enhancement in 
a two-dimensional enclosure utilizing nanofluids. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2003;46: 
3639 – 53 .
[135] Tiwari RK, Das MK. Heat transfer augmentation in a two sided lid-driven 
differentially heated square cavity utilizing nanoflu ids. Int J Heat Mass Transf 
2007;50:2002 – 18 .
[136] Bondareva NS, Sheremet MA, Pop I. Magnetic field effect on the unsteady natural 
convection in a right-angle trapezoidal cav ity filled with a nanofluid: 
Buongiorno ’ s. International Journal of Numerical Methods for Heat and Fluid 
Flow 2015;25:1924 – 46 .
[137] Gro ¸ san, T. Thermal dispersion effect on fully developed free convection of 
nanofluids in a vertical channel. Sains Malaysiana 2011;40:1429 – 35 .
[138] Kleinstreuer C, Li J, Koo J. Microfluidics of nano-drug de livery. Int J Heat Mass 
Transf 2008;51(5590):5597 .
[139] Buongiorno J. Convective transport in nanofluids. ASME Jour nal of Heat Transfer 
2006;128:240 – 50 .
[140] Celli M. Non-homogeneous model for a side heated square cavity f illed with a 
nanofluid. Int J Heat Fluid Flow 2013;44:327 – 35 .
[141] Sheikholeslami M, Bandpy MG, Ellahi R, Zeeshan A. Sim ulation of MHD 
CuO – water nanofluid flow and convective heat transfer considering Lorentz 
forces. Journal of Management and Magnetic Materials 2014;369:69 – 80 .
[142] Zhang H, Yan S, Gao H, Yuan X, Ming T. Experimental investigation and 
prediction of changes in thermal conductivity of carbon nanotube nanofluid. Int 
Commun Heat Mass Transfer 2021;127 .
[143] Shahsavar A, Shaham A, Amin M. Assessment of thermal conductivity of 
polyethylene glycol-carbon dot nanofluid through a combined experimentaldata 
mining investigation. J Mater Res Technol 2022;19:2695 – 704 .
[144] Murshed SS, De Castro CN. A critical review of traditional and emerging 
techniques and fluids for electronics cooling. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2017;78: 
821 – 33 .
[145] Lau G, Mohammadpour J, Lee A. Cooling performance of an impinging synthetic 
jet in a microchannel with nanofluids: an Eulerian approach. Appl Therm Eng 
2021;188:116624 .
[146] Sajid MU, Ali HM. Recent advances in application of nanofluids in heat transfer 
devices: a critical review. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2019;103:556 – 92 .
[147] Olabi A, Wilberforce T, Sayed ET, Elsaid K, Rahman SA, Abdelkareem MA. 
Geometrical effect coupled with nanofluid on heat transfer enhancement in heat 
exchangers. Int J Thermofluids 2021;10:100072 .
[148] Al-Dulaimi Z, Kadhim HT, Jaffer MF, Al-Manea A, Al-Rbaihat R, Alahmer A. 
Enhanced conjugate natural convection in a corrugated porousenclosure with ag- 
MgO hybrid nanofluid. Thermofluids: Int. J; 2024 .
[149] Al-Srayyih BM, Al-Manea A, Saleh K, Abed AM, Al-Amir QR, Hamzah HK, et al. 
Simulation investigation of the oscillatory motion of two elliptic obstacles located 
within a quarter-circle cavity filled with cu-Al2O3/water hybrid nanofluid. 
Numer Heat Transf, Part A: Appl 2023:1 – 25 .
[150] Rujda Parveen AK, Hussein TR, Mahapatra M, Al-Thamir A, Abidi MBB, 
Hamida RZ, et al. MHD double diffusive mixed convection and heat generation / 
absorption in a lid-driven inclined wavy enclosure filled with a ferrofluid. 
International Journal of Thermofluids 2024;22:100698 .
[151] Al-Amir QR, Hamzah HK, Ali FH, Hatami M, Al-Kouz W, Al-Manea A, et al. 
Investigation of natural convection and entropy generation in a porous titled Z- 
staggered cavity saturated by TiO2-water nanofluid. Int J Thermofluids 2023;19: 
100395 .
[152] Rehman S, Rujda Parveen W, Jamshed M, Prakash RW, Ibrahim MR, Eid SM, et al. 
Numerical simulation and entropy optimization of hybrid nanofluid flow in an 
inclined wavy enclosure subjected to thermal radiation. Proceedings of 
Mechanical Engineers Part N: Journal of Nanomaterials, Nanoengineering and 
Nanosystems 2024:1 – 16 .
[153] Vajjha RS, Das DK, Namburu PK. Numerical study of fluid dynamic and heat 
transfer performance of Al2O3 and CuO nanofluids in the flat tubes of a radiator. 
Int J Heat Fluid Flow 2010;31:613 – 21 .
[154] Faraz Naeem. Muhammad Shemyal Nisar, Yasir Khan, Anwar Hussain, Kaleem 
Iqbal, natural convection of cu-H2O nanofluid inside hexagonal enclosure fitted 
with a square cavity with a non-uniformly heated wall(s). Results Phys 2023;51: 
106648 .
[155] Rahimpour N, Moraveji MK. Free convection of water – Fe3O4 nanofluid in an 
inclined cavity subjected to a magnetic field: CFD modeling, sensitivity analysis. 
Adv Powder Technol 2017;28(6):1573 – 84 .
[156] Qurrat Ul Ain. Imtiaz Ali Shaha, Saleh Mousa Alzahrani, enhanced heat transfer in 
novel star-shaped enclosure with hybrid nanofluids: A neural network-assisted 
study, case studies in thermal. Engineering 2024;61:105065 .
[157] Hansda Samrat. Effect of thermal radiation and inclined magnetic field on 
thermosolutal mixed convection in a partially active wavy trapezoidal enclosure 
filled with hybrid nanofluid. International Journal of Thermofluids 2024;24: 
100888 .
[158] Shoaei M, Noorollahi Y, Hajinezhad A, Moosavian SF. A review of the applications 
of artificial intelligence in renewable energy systems: an approach-based study. 
Energy Convers Manag 2024;306:118207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2024.118207 .
[159] Singh P. Systematic review of data-centric approaches in artificial intelligence 
and machine learning. Data Science and Management 2023;6:144 – 57. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.dsm.2023.06.001 .
[160] Mohd Suki N, Mohd Suki N, Afshan S, Sharif A, Ariff Kasim M, Hanafi Rosmaini 
Mohd, et al. How does green technology innovation affect green growth in 
ASEAN-6 countries? Evidence from advance panel estimations. Gondwana Res 
2022;111:165 – 73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2022.06.019 .
[161] Lee C-C, Yan J. Will artificial intelligence make energy cleaner? Evidence of 
nonlinearity Applied Energy 2024;363:123081. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2024.123081 .
[162] Amasyali K, El-Gohary NM. A review of data-driven building energy consumption 
prediction studies. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2018;81:1192 – 205. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2017.04.095 .
[163] Entezari A, Aslani A, Zahedi R, Noorollahi Y. Artificial intelligence and machine 
learning in energy systems: A bibliographic perspective. Energ Strat Rev 2023;45: 
101017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2022.101017 .
[164] Kalogirou SA. Artificial intelligence for the modeling and control of combustion 
processes: a review. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2003;29:515 – 66 .
[165] Hocao ˘glu FO, Gerek 
¨
ON, Kurban M. Hourly solar radiation forecasting using 
optimal coefficient 2-D linear filters and feed-forward neural networks. Sol 
Energy 2008;82:714 – 26 .
[166] Wang X, Sideratos G, Hatziargyriou N, Tsoukalas LH, Wind speed forecasting for 
power system operational planning.. International conference on probabilistic 
methods applied to power systems. IEEE 2004;2004:470 – 4 .
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
32 
--- PAGE 33 ---
[167] Bedi G, Venayagamoorthy GK, Singh R, Navigating the challenges of Internet of 
Things (IoT) for power and energy systems. Clemson University power systems 
conference (PSC). IEEE 2016;2016:1 – 5 .
[168] Judge MA, Franzitta V, Curto D, Guercio A, Cirrincione G, Khattak HA. 
A comprehensive review of artificial intelligence approaches for smart grid 
integration and optimization. Energy Conversion and Management: X 2024; 
100724. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecmx.2024.100724 .
[169] Dokeroglu T, Sevinc E, Kucukyilmaz T, Cosar A. A survey on new generation 
metaheuristic algorithms. Comput Ind Eng 2019;137:106040. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cie.2019.106040 .
[170] Ponciroli R, Stauff NE, Ramsey J, Ganda F, Vilim RB. An improved genetic 
algorithm approach to the unit commitment/economic dispatch problem. IEEE 
Trans Power Syst 2020;35:4005 – 13 .
[171] Sayed A, Ebeed M, Ali ZM, Abdel-Rahman AB, Ahmed M, Abdel Aleem SH, et al. 
A hybrid optimization algorithm for solving of the unit commitment problem 
considering uncertainty of the load demand. Energies 2021;14:8014 .
[172] Cheng L, Yu T. A new generation of AI: A review and perspective on machine 
learning technologies applied to smart energy and electric power systems. Int J 
Energy Res 2019;43:1928 – 73. https://doi.org/10.1002/er.4333 .
[173] Samuel AL. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM J 
Res Dev 1959;3:210 – 29 .
[174] Latah M, Toker L. Artificial intelligence enabled software-defined networking: a 
comprehensive overview. IET Networks 2019;8:79 – 99. https://doi.org/10.1049/ 
iet-net.2018.5082 .
[175] Farzaneh H, Malehmirchegini L, Bejan A, Afolabi T, Mulumba A, Daka PP. 
Artificial intelligence evolution in smart buildings for energy efficiency. Appl Sci 
2021;11:763. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/app11020763 .
[176] Qiang W, Zhongli Z. Reinforcement learning model, algorithms and its 
application. In: International conference on mechatronic science. 2011. Electric 
Engineering and Computer (MEC); 2011. p. 1143 – 6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
MEC.2011.6025669 .
[177] Szczepaniuk H, Szczepaniuk EK. Applications of artificial intelligence algorithms 
in the energy sector. Energies 2023;16:347. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
en16010347 .
[178] Bouyeddou B, Harrou F, Taghezouit B, Sun Y, Hadj Arab A. Improved semi- 
supervised data-mining-based schemes for fault detection in a grid-connected 
photovoltaic system. Energies 2022;15:7978. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
en15217978 .
[179] Nelson W, Culp C. Machine learning methods for automated fault detection and 
diagnostics in building systems — A review. Energies 2022;15:5534. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/en15155534 .
[180] Mira K, Bugiotti F, Morosuk T. Artificial intelligence and machine learning in 
energy conversion and management. Energies 2023;16:7773 .
[181] Reddy Y, Viswanath P, Reddy BE. Semi-supervised learning: A brief review. Int J 
Eng Technol 2018;7:81 .
[182] Roweis ST, Saul LK. Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear 
embedding. Science 2000;290:2323 – 6. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.290.5500.2323 .
[183] Sarker IH. Deep learning: A comprehensive overview on techniques, taxonomy, 
applications and research directions. SN COMPUT SCI 2021;2:420. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s42979-021-00815-1 .
[184] Sarker IH. Data science and analytics: an overview from data-driven smart 
computing, decision-making and applications perspective. SN COMPUT SCI 2021; 
2:377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-021-00765-8 .
[185] Sarker IH, Furhad MH, Nowrozy R. Ai-driven cybersecurity: an overview, security 
intelligence modeling and research directions. SN Computer Science 2021;2:173 .
[186] Khodayar M, Liu G, Wang J, Khodayar ME. Deep learning in power systems 
research: A review. CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems 2021;7:209 – 20. 
https://doi.org/10.17775/CSEEJPES.2020.02700 .
[187] Bianchi M, De Pascale A, Melino F. Performance analysis of an integrated CHP 
system with thermal and electric energy storage for residential application. Appl 
Energy 2013;112:928 – 38 .
[188] Mir ´o L, Gasia J, Cabeza LF. Thermal energy storage (TES) for industrial waste 
heat (IWH) recovery: A review. Appl Energy 2016;179:284 – 301. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.06.147 .
[189] Agyekum EB, Velkin VI. Optimization and techno-economic assessment of 
concentrated solar power (CSP) in South-Western Africa: A case study on Ghana. 
Sustain Energy Technol Assess 2020;40:100763. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
seta.2020.100763 .
[190] Russell SJ, Norvig P. Artificial intelligence: A modern approach. Pearson; 2016 .
[191] He Z, Guo W, Zhang P. Performance prediction, optimal design and operational 
control of thermal energy storage using artificial intelligence methods. Renew 
Sust Energ Rev 2022;156:111977. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111977 .
[192] Raihan A. A comprehensive review of artificial intelligence and machine learning 
applications in energy consumption and production. Journal of Technology 
Innovations and Energy 2023;2:1 – 26. https://doi.org/10.56556/jtie.v2i4.608 .
[193] Zhang C, Yan L, Shi J. Performance prediction of a supercritical CO2 Brayton 
cycle integrated with wind farm-based molten salt energy storage: artificial 
intelligence (AI) approach. Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 2023;51:103533. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2023.103533 .
[194] Safae M, Bekkay H, Oussama EM, Mellit A, Aneli S, Arcidiacono G, et al. 
Integrated machine learning models for predictive analysis of thermal and 
electrical power generation of a photo-thermal system at Catania. Italy Case 
Studies in Thermal Engineering 2024;61:105018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
csite.2024.105018 .
[195] Liou J-L, Liao K-C, Wen H-T, Wu H-Y. A study on nitrogen oxide emission 
prediction in Taichung thermal power plant using artificial intelligence (AI) 
model. Int J Hydrog Energy 2024;63:1 – 9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2024.03.120 .
[196] Odufuwa OY, Tartibu LK, Kusakana K, Hohne PA, Numbi BP. Application of 
artificial neural networks in predicting the performance of ice thermal energy 
storage systems. J Energy Storage 2024;95:112547. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2024.112547 .
[197] Wallace J, Hedengren J, Powell K, Memmott M. Model predictive control of a 
grid-scale thermal energy storage system in RELAP5-3D. Prog Nucl Energy 2024; 
177:105410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2024.105410 .
[198] Arcos – Aviles D, Salazar A, Rodriguez M, Martinez W, Guinjoan F. Model 
predictive control-based energy management system for an isolated electro- 
thermal microgrid in the Amazon region of Ecuador. Energy Convers Manag 
2024;310:118479. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2024.118479 .
[199] Kharat RS, Suryaprakash Kalos P, Kachhoria R, Kadam VE, Jaiswal S, Birari D, 
et al. Thermal analysis of fuel cells in renewable energy systems using generative 
adversarial networks (GANs) and reinforcement learning. Thermal Science and 
Engineering Progress 2024;54:102816. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tsep.2024.102816 .
[200] Danish MSS, Nazari Z, Senjyu T. AI-coherent data-driven forecasting model for a 
combined cycle power plant. Energy Convers Manag 2023;286:117063. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2023.117063 .
[201] Alassery F, Alzahrani A, Khan AI, Irshad K, Islam S. An artificial intelligence- 
based solar radiation prophesy model for green energy utilization in energy 
management system. Sustain Energy Technol Assess 2022;52:102060. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2022.102060 .
[202] Shaban WM, Kabeel AE, El Hadi Attia M, Talaat FM. Optimizing photovoltaic 
thermal solar systems efficiency through advanced artificial intelligence driven 
thermal management techniques. Appl Therm Eng 2024;247:123029. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2024.123029 .
[203] Singh D, Rugamba T, Katara H, Grewal KS. Computationally effective machine 
learning approach for modular thermal energy storage design. Appl Energy 2025; 
377:124430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.124430 .
[204] Li Y, Dai Z, Fu H. A graph-based hybrid deep learning approach for the thermal 
performance potential prediction of green roofs. Journal of Building Engineering 
2024;84:108554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2024.108554 .
[205] Hajialigol N, Fattahi A, Karimi N, Jamali M, Keighobadi S. Hybridized power- 
hydrogen generation using various configurations of Brayton-organic flash 
Rankine cycles fed by a sustainable fuel: exergy and exergoeconomic analyses 
with ANN prediction. Energy 2024;290:130166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2023.130166 .
[206] Kijo-Kleczkowska A, Gnatowski A, Krzywanski J, Gajek M, Szumera M, Tora B, 
et al. Experimental research and prediction of heat generation during plastics, 
coal and biomass waste combustion using thermal analysis methods. Energy 
2024;290:130168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.130168 .
[207] Rehman KU, Shatanawi W, Alharbi WG, Shatnawi TAM. AI-neural networking 
analysis (NNA) of thermally slip magnetized Williamson (TSMW) fluid flow with 
heat source. Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 2024;56:104248. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.csite.2024.104248 .
[208] Wei N, Li C, Peng X, Zeng F, Lu X. Conventional models and artificial intelligence- 
based models for energy consumption forecasting: A review. J Pet Sci Eng 2019; 
181:106187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2019.106187 .
[209] Jebaraj S, Iniyan S, Goic R. Forecasting of coal consumption using an artificial 
neural network and comparison with various forecasting techniques. Energy 
Sources, Part A: Recovery, Utilization, and Environmental Effects 2011;33: 
1305 – 16. https://doi.org/10.1080/15567030903397859 .
[210] Azadeh A, Babazadeh R, Asadzadeh SM. Optimum estimation and forecasting of 
renewable energy consumption by artificial neural networks. Renew Sust Energ 
Rev 2013;27:605 – 12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.07.007 .
[211] Szoplik J. Forecasting of natural gas consumption with artificial neural networks. 
Energy 2015;85:208 – 20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.03.084 .
[212] Akdemir B, Çetinkaya N, Kulaksiz AA. Forcasting renewable energy potential of 
Turkey using artificial neural network up to 2030. International Conference on 
Clean and Green Energy: IACSIT Press Singapore; 2012. p. 30 – 5 .
[213] Feng Z, Zhang M, Wei N, Zhao J, Zhang T, He X. An office building energy 
consumption forecasting model with dynamically combined residual error 
correction based on the optimal model. Energy Rep 2022;8:12442 – 55. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2022.09.022 .
[214] Li S, Li R. Comparison of forecasting energy consumption in Shandong, China 
using the ARIMA model, GM model, and ARIMA-GM model. Sustainability 2017; 
9:1181 .
[215] Gonzalez-Briones A, Hernandez G, Corchado JM, Omatu S, Mohamad MS. 
Machine learning models for electricity consumption forecasting: A review. In: 
2019 2nd international conference on computer applications & information 
security (ICCAIS). IEEE; 2019. p. 1 – 6 .
[216] Wahid F, Kim D. A prediction approach for demand analysis of energy 
consumption using K-nearest neighbor in residential buildings. IJSH 2016;10: 
97 – 108. https://doi.org/10.14257/ijsh.2016.10.2.10 .
[217] Liang Y, Pan Y, Yuan X, Jia W, Huang Z. Surrogate modeling for long-term and 
high-resolution prediction of building thermal load with a metric-optimized KNN 
algorithm. Energy and Built Environment 2023;4:709 – 24. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.enbenv.2022.06.008 .
[218] Ramos D, Faria P, Gomes L, Campos P, Vale Z. Selection of features in 
reinforcement learning applied to energy consumption forecast in buildings 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
33 
--- PAGE 34 ---
according to different contexts. Energy Rep 2022;8:423 – 9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.egyr.2022.01.047 .
[219] Bian H, Zhong Y, Sun J, Shi F. Study on power consumption load forecast based 
on K-means clustering and FCM – BP model. Energy Rep 2020;6:693 – 700. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2020.11.148 .
[220] Hani Mohamed Salleh F, Binti Saripuddin M. Monitoring Thermal Comfort Level 
of Commercial Buildings ’ Occupants in a Hot-Humid Climate Country Using K- 
nearest Neighbors Model. In: 2020 5th International Conference on Power and 
Renewable Energy (ICPRE); 2020. p. 209 – 15. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ICPRE51194.2020.9233145 .
[221] Hong W-C. Electric load forecasting by support vector model. Appl Math Model 
2009;33:2444 – 54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2008.07.010 .
[222] Cao G, Wu L. Support vector regression with fruit fly optimization algorithm for 
seasonal electricity consumption forecasting. Energy 2016;115:734 – 45. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2016.09.065 .
[223] Zhong H, Wang J, Jia H, Mu Y, Lv S. Vector field-based support vector regression 
for building energy consumption prediction. Appl Energy 2019;242:403 – 14. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.078 .
[224] Magoul `es F, Piliougine M, Elizondo D. Support Vector Regression for Electricity 
Consumption Prediction in a Building in Japan. In: 2016 IEEE Intl Conference on 
Computational Science and Engineering (CSE) and IEEE Intl Conference on 
Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing (EUC) and 15th Intl Symposium on 
Distributed Computing and Applications for Business Engineering (DCABES); 
2016. p. 189 – 96. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSE-EUC-DCABES.2016.184 .
[225] Cai W, Wen X, Li C, Shao J, Xu J. Predicting the energy consumption in buildings 
using the optimized support vector regression model. Energy 2023;273:127188. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.127188 .
[226] Ahmad MW, Reynolds J, Rezgui Y. Predictive modelling for solar thermal energy 
systems: A comparison of support vector regression, random forest, extra trees 
and regression trees. J Clean Prod 2018;203:810 – 21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2018.08.207 .
[227] Khajavi H, Rastgoo A. Improving the prediction of heating energy consumed at 
residential buildings using a combination of support vector regression and meta- 
heuristic algorithms. Energy 2023;272:127069. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2023.127069 .
[228] Aye SA, Heyns PS. An integrated Gaussian process regression for prediction of 
remaining useful life of slow speed bearings based on acoustic emission. Mech 
Syst Signal Process 2017;84:485 – 98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ymssp.2016.07.039 .
[229] García-Nieto PJ, García-Gonzalo E, Paredes-S ´anchez JP, Bernardo S ´anchez A. 
A new hybrid model to foretell thermal power efficiency from energy 
performance certificates at residential dwellings applying a Gaussian process 
regression. Neural Comput & Applic 2021;33:6627 – 40. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00521-020-05427-z .
[230] Feng Y, Huang Y, Shang H, Lou J, Knefaty A, Deen Yao J, et al. Prediction of 
hourly air-conditioning energy consumption in office buildings based on Gaussian 
process regression. Energies 2022;15:4626 .
[231] Massa Gray F, Schmidt M. Thermal building modelling using Gaussian processes. 
Energ Buildings 2016;119:119 – 28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2016.02.004 .
[232] Jiang J, Yu Y, Min H, Cao Q, Sun W, Zhang Z, et al. Trip-level energy consumption 
prediction model for electric bus combining Markov-based speed profile 
generation and Gaussian processing regression. Energy 2023;263:125866. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2022.125866 .
[233] Lahouar A, Slama Ben Hadj, J.. Day-ahead load forecast using random forest and 
expert input selection. Energy Convers Manag 2015;103:1040 – 51. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.07.041 .
[234] Ahmad MW, Mourshed M, Rezgui Y. Trees vs neurons: comparison between 
random forest and ANN for high-resolution prediction of building energy 
consumption. Energ Buildings 2017;147:77 – 89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2017.04.038 .
[235] Xu W, Tu J, Xu N, Liu Z. Predicting daily heating energy consumption in 
residential buildings through integration of random forest model and meta- 
heuristic algorithms. Energy 2024;301:131726. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2024.131726 .
[236] Salimian Rizi B, Pavlak G, Cushing V, Heidarinejad M. Predicting uncertainty of a 
chiller plant power consumption using quantile random forest: A commercial 
building case study. Energy 2023;283:129112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2023.129112 .
[237] Pham A-D, Ngo N-T, Ha Truong TT, Huynh N-T, Truong N-S. Predicting energy 
consumption in multiple buildings using machine learning for improving energy 
efficiency and sustainability. J Clean Prod 2020;260:121082. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121082 .
[238] Bishop C. Pattern recognition and machine learning |. 1st ed. New York, NY: 
Springer; 2006 .
[239] Ghalkhani M, Habibi S. Review of the Li-ion battery, thermal management, and 
AI-based battery management system for EV application. Energies 2023;16:185. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en16010185 .
[240] Ilager S, Ramamohanarao K, Buyya R. Thermal prediction for efficient energy 
Management of Clouds using. Mach Learn 2020. https://doi.org/10.48550/ 
arXiv.2011.03649 .
[241] Razavi S. Deep learning, explained: fundamentals, explainability, and 
bridgeability to process-based modelling. Environ Model Softw 2021;144: 
105159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2021.105159 .
[242] Hammoodi Karrar A, et al. Energy and exergy analysis of pyramid-type solar still 
coupled with magnetic and electrical effects by using matlab simulation. Front 
Heat Mass Transf 2024;22:217 – 62 .
[243] Elsheikh Ammar, et al. Augmentation and evaluation of solar still performance: A 
comprehensive review. Desalination 2024;574:117239 .
[244] Alawee Wissam H, et al. Effects of magnetic field on the performance of solar 
distillers: a review study. Engineering and Technology Journal 2023;41(1): 
121 – 31 .
[245] Hammoodi Karrar A, et al. Improving the performance of a pyramid solar still 
using different wick materials and reflectors in Iraq. Desalin Water Treat 2023; 
285:1 – 10 .
[246] Khan O, Parvez M, Alansari M, Farid M, Devarajan Y, Thanappan S. Application of 
artificial intelligence in green building concept for energy auditing using drone 
technology under different environmental conditions. Sci Rep 2023;13(1):8200 .
[247] Patra B, Nema P, Khan MZ, Khan O. Optimization of solar energy using MPPT 
techniques and industry 4.0 modelling. Sustain Oper Comput 2023;4:22 – 8. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susoc.2022.10.001 .
[248] Mohanpuria P, Rana NK, Yadav SK. Biosynthesis of nanoparticles: technological 
concepts and future applications. J Nanopart Res 2008;10:507 – 17 .
[249] Khan S, Tomar S, Fatima M, Khan MZ. Impact of artificial intelligent and industry 
4.0 based products on consumer behaviour characteristics: A meta-analysis-based 
review. Sustain Oper Comput 2022;3:218 – 25 .
[250] Elsheikh AH, Sharshir SW, Sepp ¨anen T, Kabeel AE, Guilan W, Haiou Z. Modeling 
of solar energy systems using artificial neural network: A comprehensive review. 
Sol Energy 2019;180:622 – 39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.01.037 .
[251] Seraj M, et al. Analytical research of artificial intelligent models for machining 
industry under varying environmental strategies: an industry 4.0 approach. 
Sustain Oper Comput 2022;3:176 – 87 .
[252] Liang R, et al. Buildings ’ internal heat gains prediction using artificial intelligence 
methods. Energ Buildings 2022;258:111794. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2021.111794 .
[253] Shokouhmand H, Ghazvini M, Shabanian J. Performance analysis of using 
nanofluids in microchannel heat sink in different flow regimes and its simulation 
using artificial neural network. In: Proceedings of the World Congress on 
Engineering, WCE ’ 08. 3; 2008 .
[254] Olawade David B, et al. The synergy of artificial intelligence and nanotechnology 
towards advancing innovation and sustainability-A Mini-review. Nano Trends 
2024;8:100052 .
[255] Said Zafar, et al. Nanotechnology-integrated phase change material and 
nanofluids for solar applications as a potential approach for clean energy 
strategies: Progress, challenges, and opportunities. J Clean Prod 2023;416: 
137736 .
[256] Usri NA, et al. Thermal conductivity enhancement of Al2O3 nanofluid in ethylene 
glycol and water mixture. Energy Procedia 2015;79:397 – 402 .
[257] Wang Nan, et al. Application of nanomaterials in antifouling: A review. Nano. 
Mater Sci 2024;6(6):672 – 700 .
[258] Alhamrouni Ibrahim, et al. A comprehensive review on the role of artificial 
intelligence in power system stability, control, and protection: insights and future 
directions. Appl Sci 2024;14(14):6214 .
[259] Bennagi Aseel, et al. Comprehensive study of the artificial intelligence applied in 
renewable energy. Energ Strat Rev 2024;54:101446 .
[260] Choi Wonbong, et al. “ artificial intelligence and machine learning in the design 
and additive manufacturing of responsive composites. ” MRS. Communications 
2023;13(5):714 – 24 .
[261] Vivanco-Benavides Luis Enrique, et al. Machine learning and materials 
informatics approaches in the analysis of physical properties of carbon nanotubes: 
A review. Comput Mater Sci 2022;201:110939 .
[262] Atiqur Rahman, Md, et al. Review on nanofluids: preparation, properties, 
stability, and thermal performance augmentation in heat transfer applications. 
ACS omega 2024;9(30):32328 – 49 .
[263] Arun M, et al. Parabolic trough solar collector technology using TiO2 nanofluids 
with dimpled tubes. Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 2024;61:104840 .
[264] Hassan SA, et al. Development of nanotechnology by artificial intelligence: A 
comprehensive review. Journal of Nanostructures 2023;13(4):915 – 32 .
[265] Ji C, Waqas H, Liu D, Kang C, Muhammad T. Melting performance improvement 
of phase change materials with thermal energy storage unit using nanoparticles. 
Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 2024;104892. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
csite.2024.104892 .
[266] Arıcı M, Tütüncü E, Yıldız Ç, Li D. Enhancement of PCM melting rate via internal 
fin and nanoparticles. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2020;156:119845. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.119845 .
[267] Mourad A, Qasem NA, Abderrahmane A, Marzouki R, Guedri K, Younis O, et al. 
Numerical study on n-octadecane PCM melting process inside a pear-shaped 
finned container. Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 2022;38:102328. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2022.102328 .
[268] Basem A. Numerical analysis is being conducted to investigate the effect of Nano 
fluids on the melting process of phase change materials (PCMs) in a semi- 
cylindrical container. Applications in Engineering Science 2024;19:100185. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apples.2024.100185 .
[269] Motevali A, Hasandust Rostami M, Najafi G, Yan WM. Evaluation and 
improvement of PCM melting in double tube heat exchangers using different 
combinations of nanoparticles and PCM (the case of renewable energy systems). 
Sustainability 2021;13(19):10675. https://doi.org/10.3390/su131910675 .
[270] Ghalambaz M, Mehryan SAM, Ayoubloo KA, Hajjar A, El Kadri M, Younis O, et al. 
Thermal energy storage and heat transfer of nano-enhanced phase change 
material (NePCM) in a shell and tube thermal energy storage (TES) unit with a 
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
34 
--- PAGE 35 ---
partial layer of eccentric copper foam. Molecules 2021;26(5):1491. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/molecules26051491 .
[271] Zahid I, Farhan M, Farooq M, Asim M, Imran M. Experimental investigation for 
thermal performance enhancement of various heat sinks using Al2O3 NePCM for 
cooling of electronic devices. Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 2023;41: 
102553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2022.102553 .
[272] Al-Rashed AA. Thermal management of lithium-ion batteries with simultaneous 
use of hybrid nanofluid and nano-enhanced phase change material: A numerical 
study. J Energy Storage 2022;46:103730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2021.103730 .
[273] Temel UN, Kilinc F, Coskun S. Thermal protection performances of the macro 
and/or nano enhanced PCM in a representative battery pack. Nanoscale and 
Microscale Thermophysical Engineering 2022;26(1):52 – 66. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/15567265.2022.2069615 .
[274] Ashok V, Geetha NB, Rajkumar S, Pauline T. Experimental investigations for 
thermal energy management by encapsulation of Nano-enhanced bio phase 
change material in buildings. Energy Sources, Part A: Recovery, Utilization and 
Environmental Effects 2022;44(18). https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
15567036.2021.1967517 .
[275] Li D, Fu Q, Yang R, Zhang C, Duan Y, Yuan Z. Thermal performance of glazing 
envelopes embedded with nano-enhanced paraffin: a comparative study. Constr 
Build Mater 2024;442:137612. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
conbuildmat.2024.137612 .
[276] Abdollahi N, Rahimi M. Potential of water natural circulation coupled with nano- 
enhanced PCM for PV module cooling. Renew Energy 2020;147:302 – 9. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.09.002 .
[277] Bharathiraja R, Ramkumar T, Karthick L, Mohanraj M. Performance investigation 
on flat plate solar water collector using a hybrid nano-enhanced phase change 
material (PCM). J Energy Storage 2024;86:111163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2024.111163 .
[278] Priyadarshi G, Baruah D, Naik BK. Design and performance prediction of 
desiccant coated heat exchanger using ANFIS – AI tool and dynamic model. Appl 
Therm Eng 2022;217:119034. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2022.119034 .
[279] Abdul Hussein SA, Shbailat SJ. Impact of bumpers position variation on heat 
exchanger performance: an experimental and predictive analysis using an 
artificial neural network. J Eng Appl Sci 2023;70(1):6. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s44147-023-00176-x .
[280] Askar AH, Kov ´acs E, Boll ´o B. Prediction and optimization of thermal loads in 
buildings with different shapes by neural networks and recent finite difference 
methods. Buildings 2023;13(11):2862. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
buildings13112862 .
[281] Issa O, Endre K, Betti B. Multi-objective optimization and simulation for multiple 
models of walls to estimate heat gain using artificial neural network model. 
Multidiszciplin ´aris Tudom ´anyok 2023;13(3):159 – 74. https://doi.org/10.35925/ 
j.multi.2023.3.17 .
[282] Khan O, Parvez M, Seraj M, Yahya Z, Devarajan Y, Nagappan B. Optimising 
building heat load prediction using advanced control strategies and artificial 
intelligence for HVAC system. Thermal Science and Engineering Progress 2024; 
49:102484. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsep.2024.102484 .
[283] Rocha HR, Fiorotti R, Louzada DM, Silvestre LJ, Celeste WC, Silva JA. Net zero 
energy cost building system design based on artificial intelligence. Appl Energy 
2024;355:122348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.122348 .
[284] Cox SJ, Kim D, Cho H, Mago P. Real time optimal control of district cooling 
system with thermal energy storage using neural networks. Appl Energy 2019; 
238:466 – 80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.01.093 .
[285] Askar AH, Kov ´acs E, Boll ´o B. ANN modeling for thermal load estimation in a cabin 
vehicle. In: Vehicle and automotive engineering. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing; 2022. p. 357 – 73. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15211-5_31 .
[286] Eldokaishi AO, Abdelsalam MY, Kamal MM, Abotaleb HA. Modeling of water- 
PCM solar thermal storage system for domestic hot water application using 
artificial neural networks. Appl Therm Eng 2022;204:118009. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.118009 .
[287] Cui W, Si T, Li X, Li X, Lu L, Ma T, et al. Heat transfer analysis of phase change 
material composited with metal foam-fin hybrid structure in inclination container 
by numerical simulation and artificial neural network. Energy Rep 2022;8: 
10203 – 18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2022.07.178 .
[288] Leng X, Sun X, Xu J, Huang W. Optimal planning of a hybrid system integrating of 
combined cooling, heat and power and energy storage resources. Sustain Energy 
Technol Assess 2022;50:101806. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2021.101806 .
[289] Lee D, Ooka R, Matsuda Y, Ikeda S, Choi W. Experimental analysis of artificial 
intelligence-based model predictive control for thermal energy storage under 
different cooling load conditions. Sustain Cities Soc 2022;79:103700. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scs.2022.103700 .
[290] Xiao T, Liu Z, Lu L, Han H, Huang X, Song X, et al. LSTM-BP neural network 
analysis on solid-liquid phase change in a multi-channel thermal storage tank. 
Eng Anal Bound Elem 2023;146:226 – 40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enganabound.2022.10.014 .
[291] Mahdi NM, Jassim AH, Abulqasim SA, Basem A, Ogaili AAF, Al-Haddad LA. Leak 
detection and localization in water distribution systems using advanced feature 
analysis and an artificial neural network. Desalin Water Treat 2024;320:100685. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dwt.2024.100685 .
[292] Olatunde TM, Okwandu AC, Akande DO, Sikhakhane ZQ. Reviewing the role of 
artificial intelligence in energy efficiency optimization. Engineering Science & 
Technology Journal 2024;5(4):1243 – 56. https://doi.org/10.51594/estj. 
v5i4.1015 .
[293] Chen C, Hu Y, Karuppiah M, Kumar PM. Artificial intelligence on economic 
evaluation of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies. Sustain 
Energy Technol Assess 2021;47:101358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
seta.2021.101358 .
[294] Kadhim SA, Askar AH, Saleh AAM. An enhancement of double pipe heat 
exchanger performance at a constant wall temperature using a nanofluid of iron 
oxide and refrigerant vapor. Journal of Thermal Engineering 2024;10(1):78 – 87. 
https://doi.org/10.18186/thermal.1429191 .
[295] Aytaç 
˙
I, Tuncer AD, Khanlari A, Variyenli H
˙
I, Mantıcı S, Güng ¨or L, et al. 
Investigating the effects of using MgO-CuO/water hybrid nanofluid in an 
evacuated solar water collector: A comprehensive survey. Thermal Science and 
Engineering Progress 2023;39:101688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tsep.2023.101688 .
[296] Razzaq MA, Ahamed JU, Hossain MAM. Effect of TiO2/MO nano-lubricant on 
energy and exergy savings of an air conditioner using blends of R22/R600a. 
International Journal of Automotive and Mechanical Engineering 2020;17(4): 
8283 – 97. https://doi.org/10.15282/ijame.17.4.2020.06.0626 .
[297] Abdullah AS, Essa FA, Bacha HB, Omara ZM. Improving the trays solar still 
performance using reflectors and phase change material with nanoparticles. 
J Energy Storage 2020;31:101744. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2020.101744 .
[298] Hussain Mohib, et al. An artificial intelligence and machine learning-driven CFD 
simulation for optimizing thermal performance of blood-integrated ternary nano- 
fluid. Engineering Applications of Computational Fluid Mechanics 2025;19(1): 
2459664 .
[299] Ahmad T, Zhu H, Zhang D, Tariq R, Bassam A, Ullah F, et al. Energetics systems 
and artificial intelligence: applications of industry 4.0. Energy Rep 2022;8: 
334 – 61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.11.256 .
H.I. Mohammed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Applied Energy 400 (2025) 126576 
35 