
===== PAGE 1 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
Available online 19 September 2023
2352-152X/© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Research Papers 
Enhancing solar thermal collector systems for hot water production through 
machine learning-driven multi-objective optimization with phase change 
material (PCM) 
Ehsanolah Assareh
a , b , c , * , 1
, Amjad Riaz
b , d , 1
, Mehrdad Ahmadinejad
e , 1
, Siamak Hoseinzadeh
f , **
, 
Mohammad Zaheri Abdehvand
a
, Sajjad Keykhah
a
, Tohid Jafarinejad
g
, Rahim Moltames
h
, 
Moonyong Lee
b , ** 
a
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Islamic Azad University Dezful Branch, Dezful, Iran 
b
School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan 38541, South Korea 
c
Mechanical Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Quchan University of Technology, Quchan, Iran 
d
Department of Chemical Engineering, COMSATS University, Islamabad (Lahore Campus), Pakistan 
e
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA 
f
Department of Planning, Design, and Technology of Architecture Sapienza University of Rome, Rome 00196, Italy 
g
Department of Energy Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran 
h
Department of Renewable Energy and Environment, Faculty of New Sciences and Technologies, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Solar thermal collector 
PCM 
Diameter/area of storage tank 
Building energy system 
Energy storage 
ABSTRACT  
Energy storage and supply in solar thermal collector systems rely heavily on phase change materials (PCM). It is 
vital to establish the appropriate values for energy discharge time (t
PCM
) and net amount of stored energy (Q
net
) 
within the PCMs in order to increase the efficiency of solar thermal collectors. For this study, we implemented a 
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition (MOEA/D) for the optimization process using 
the MATLAB simulator software. The simulation findings show that, under ideal circumstances where t
PCM 
is 
large and Q
net 
is low, these two goal functions are inversely connected to one another. According to an analysis of 
how input parameters affect the objective functions, the mass of PCM is minimized and the mass flow rate of the 
input water is increased under ideal circumstances. The relationship between the tube ’ s inner diameter and the 
t
PCM 
objective function shows that an increase in the tube ’ s diameter corresponds to an increase in the energy 
discharge time. The amount of stored energy in the PCM increases when the system parameters are held constant 
while the tube diameter is increased. Additionally, we investigated the effects of several solid PCM materials on 
the discharge time and the energy stored.   
1. Introduction 
Many dedicated researchers have conducted in-depth analyses to 
determine whether it is feasible to employ renewable energy sources and 
energy storage technologies to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels 
[ 1 – 4 ]. Solar radiation may be collected using photovoltaic cells or solar 
collectors, making it one of the most widely available forms of renew -
able energy [ 5 ]. Solar thermal collectors are effective at gathering solar 
energy and converting it into usable energy for a number of uses, such as 
heating air for HVAC systems, water for hygiene, or even storing solar 
heat for use as a passive heating system in buildings [ 6 – 9 ]. Phase change 
materials (PCMs) offer a very practical alternative for storing heat, 
especially for low-temperature applications like dwellings [ 10 – 13 ] and 
high temperature application (e.g. power generation) [ 14 , 15 ]. 
Numerous studies have examined the viability of PCMs as a funda -
mental form of energy storage, and all have demonstrated the enormous 
improvements that PCMs may bring to energy systems [ 16 – 19 ]. To 
attain the best performance in these systems, energy optimization ap -
proaches are widely utilized. These methods use a variety of objective 
functions that consider heterogeneous elements including energy, 
environment, and economy [ 20 , 21 ]. Numerous investigations on PCM 
* Correspondence to: E. Assareh, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Islamic Azad University Dezful Branch, Dezful, Iran. 
** Corresponding authors. 
E-mail addresses: Ehsanolah.assareh@yu.ac.kr (E. Assareh), Siamak.hosseinzadeh@uniroma1.it (S. Hoseinzadeh), mynlee@ynu.ac.kr (M. Lee).   
1 
These authors contributed equally to this article as the first authors. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Energy Storage 
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/est 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2023.108990 
Received 6 May 2023; Received in revised form 26 August 2023; Accepted 10 September 2023   
===== PAGE 2 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
2
energy storage system optimization methods have been carried out. For 
instance, an exergoeconomic optimization of a solar thermal energy 
system was performed by Aghbalou et al. [ 22 ]. The system was made up 
of a solar collector and a rectangular water tank with a PCM casing that 
served as a thermal energy storage system. Their investigation into how 
convection and conductivity impact heat transfer offered a mathemat -
ical justification for the PCM ’ s melting. Guo et al. [ 11 ] focused on get -
ting the solar collector area and storage tank of a system with short-term 
heat storage for space heating applications to fit together as well as 
feasible. They were able to establish an ideal ratio between the collec -
tion area and storage tank volume. 
An integrated optimization method for using PCMs in thermal stor -
age devices was presented by Lin et al. [ 23 ]. The two performance 
measures that made up the study ’ s aim function were the average heat 
transfer efficacy and effective PCM charging time. The use of a genetic 
algorithm to determine the optimum Pareto front and a method for 
making decisions with numerous criteria allowed the system ’ s efficiency 
of heat transmission to rise from 44.25 % to 59.29 %. Furthermore, the 
real PCM charging time increased from 4.53 to 6.11 h. Heat storage units 
are used in solar energy storage systems to combat the variability and 
unpredictability of solar energy. These systems use PCMs as their storage 
medium. Nekoonam and Roshandel [ 24 ] have quantitatively investi -
gated a system consisting of a PCM-based cascaded energy storage unit 
and an energy collector. They demonstrated that the various-PCM en -
ergy storage unit ’ s charging effectiveness is increased by a minimum of 
7 % in its ideal configuration. Lin et al. [ 25 ] carried out a study aimed at 
optimizing an experimental research and two-level model-based 
approach were used to integrate a solar photovoltaic thermally collector 
with thermal energy storage in phase change materials. According to the 
experimental results, regulating the air flow rate at a particular solar 
radiation level resulted in the solar-powered thermal collector combined 
with PCM thermal power storage operating at its maximum efficiency. 
Mahfuz et al. [ 26 ] analysed the performance of a shell and tube 
thermal energy storage system using paraffin wax as the phase change 
material, for a solar water heating application, due to its significant 
capacity for storing energy and isothermal discharge and charging 
performance. Huang et al. [ 27 ] developed a novel solar energy storage 
structure and utilized a combined approach of numerical and experi -
mental analyses to evaluate the performance of phase change materials. 
The findings revealed that the PCM in the proposed energy storage 
structure exhibited excellent performance, which was consistent with 
the numerical model. Asgharian and Baniasadi [ 28 ] conducted a 
comprehensive literature review to compare and evaluate various 
mathematical models, numerical methods, and thermodynamic analyses 
for phase change material-based systems in various solar energy storage 
applications. The study primarily focuses on modeling and simulation of 
such systems to analyse their accuracy and efficiency. Shamsi et al. [ 29 ] 
established a model for Cascade Latent Heat Storage that blends a ge -
netic algorithm technique with a characteristics-based strategy to fully 
utilize a sequential multi-layer Phase Change Material thermal energy 
system for storage. The study aims to enhance the efficiency and ca -
pacity factor of the thermal heat storage system, which is a crucial 
component in solar power plants for reducing power generation costs. 
The study found that applying the genetic algorithm and the 
characteristic-based strategy to optimize the system led to a consider -
able improvement in system performance. Specifically, the optimization 
yielded a 5 % increase in energy discharged over an 8-hour charge- 
discharge cycle, and a 5.12 % increase in energy stored during a 4- 
hour charge period, surpassing the performance a storage device with 
a single PCM. 
Fossil fuels are limited and will eventually run out, or there will come 
a time when it will be too expensive to extract what is left. Also, fossil 
fuels cause air, water, and soil pollution, producing greenhouse gases 
that cause global warming. In this situation, renewable energy sources 
are clean alternatives to fossil fuels. Nowadays, researchers pay atten -
tion to renewable systems for producing different energies, including 
electricity, cooling, heating, hydrogen, and fresh water, and to over -
come the crisis of energy shortage, they pay attention to renewable 
systems, including solar, wind, and earth systems. Heat is a necessary 
thing that currently many researches and studies have been done on 
solar systems, but more complete research is needed to complete 
renewable studies [ 30 – 43 ]. 
The use of hot water thermal storage systems is very widespread; 
Because fossil resources are limited and energies must be compatible 
with the environment in such conditions. This method is an efficient 
solution for energy storage that has a high capacity to store energy and 
supply it at a constant temperature (isotherm mode). To store energy, so- 
called phase change materials (PCM) are used, which have the task of 
storing energy in the form of latent heat. In recent decades, various 
studies have been carried out in the field of heat transfer within systems 
that have PCM by analyzing the latent energy stored in the system. These 
studies have included energy storage methods, latent heat storage ma -
terials, classification of PCMs, measurement methods, computational 
and heat transfer issues, thermal energy storage systems and their fa -
cilities, etc. The solar thermal energy storage system is one of the most 
widely used systems, and its use is expanding day by day. 
Nomenclature 
T
a 
Ambient temperature [
◦
C] 
A Area [m
2
] 
C
P 
Specific heat of air and water at constant pressure [kJ/kg. 
K] 
˙m Mass flow rate [kg/s] 
t Time [h] 
T Temperature [
◦
C] 
h Height 
D Diameter 
W width 
U Overall heat transfer coefficient [kW/m
2
K] 
t
PCM 
discharge time 
Q
net 
quantity of stored energy 
F Feed water mass flow rate [kg/s] 
C
P 
Specific heat of air and water at constant pressure [kJ/kg.K] 
˙
Q
u 
collector heat gained, (kW) 
˙m Mass flow rate [kg/s] 
N number of covering glasses 
ε
p 
plane emission intensity 
ε
g 
glass emission intensity (0/88) 
β collector gradient 
h
w 
coefficient of wind heat transfer 
˙
Q Heat transfer rate [kW] 
Subscripts 
N Number 
i in 
e out 
Abbreviations 
PCM Phase Change Materials 
MOEA/D multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on 
decomposition 
Greek symbol 
φ plane angle  
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 3 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
3
This research focuses on enhancing the performance of solar thermal 
collectors and phase change materials (PCM) used for hot water pro -
duction, with the aim of reducing our reliance on fossil fuels. While 
previous studies have separately optimized either the collectors or PCM, 
this study takes a comprehensive approach by combining both through a 
powerful and effective multiple-purpose evolutionary technique based 
on decomposition. This approach, widely recognized in engineering and 
resource planning, excels at handling multiple objectives simulta -
neously. The optimization algorithm targets two crucial parameters - 
energy discharge time (t
PCM
) and net quantity of stored energy (Q
net
) - 
which significantly impact the overall efficiency of the system. To 
further refine the optimization process, decision-making techniques and 
response surface methodology have been employed. This integrated 
approach holds tremendous potential for significantly improving the 
performance of solar thermal collectors and PCM storage tanks, leading 
to more efficient and cost-effective energy systems. The outcomes of this 
study not only contribute to advancing renewable energy technologies 
but also have the potential to guide future research and development 
efforts. By moving closer to a sustainable future, this research takes a 
meaningful step towards reducing our carbon footprint and creating a 
cleaner and greener world. 
2. Methodology 
2.1. Method 
In a genuine system, there are a number of objectives that may need 
to be achieved simultaneously even when they are in conflict. A 
multiple-purpose evolutionary approach has been utilized in several 
researches to verify that the system has reached one of the many opti -
mum stages. This approach has been applied in engineering problem- 
solving, work scheduling, regulation of resource storage, and various 
other areas, proving to be a straightforward and highly effective method 
[ 44 ]. A problem involving multiple optimization objectives is broken 
down into a number of single-objective optimizing sub-problems as part 
of the suggested method for solving it. These sub-problems are simul -
taneously solved using a population-based optimization method. A 
weight vector is assigned to each sub-problem, which is used to aggre -
gate the objective functions into a single objective function. To ensure 
the stability of the solutions, we assume that certain conditions hold, 
including one-dimensional flow and a sky that behaves like a black 
substance for long irradiation of heating properties that are independent 
of temperature. 
Thermal energy phase change materials can be stored in two forms 
sensible and latent heat energy. In sensible energy storage, thermal 
energy is stored in a solid or liquid object by increasing its temperature. 
The amount of sensible energy stored in the body depends on the tem -
perature, specific heat capacity, and mass of the body. Thermal energy is 
stored latently by the body when the body changes its phase from solid 
to liquid liquid to gas or solid to solid. Phase change materials store 
energy in the form of latent heat of fusion. Heat storage is done in 3 ways 
phase change, In the first case, which is the phase change from solid to 
solid, it is not suitable because the heat transfer is very slow and small. In 
the second case, it is not practical to change the liquid to gas phase due 
to the need for high heat and the creation of a high-pressure volume of 
gas. However the phase change from solid to liquid is more suitable, and 
this feature exists in PCM phase change materials, which change from 
solid to liquid phase by absorbing heat at a constant temperature. These 
materials release energy almost at the same temperature as they absorb. 
The objectives of the research are summarized as follows: 
1- Evaluation of the performance of systematic effective committees. 
2- Multi-objective optimization with the optimal design approach. 
3- Increasing efficiency and reducing operating costs. 
2.2. System description 
Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the solar heat storage unit. This system 
consists of a flat plate solar collector, a water storage tank with disodium 
hydrogen phosphate as PCM inside the PCM tank, a pipeline, and several 
valves. The purified water is in pipes in the collector flow. When the sun 
shines, the temperature of the water inside the collector pipes increases. 
Then it goes into the water tank which is part of the PCM tank. Thermal 
energy is transferred from hot water to solid PCM, which has a melting 
temperature of 29 degrees Celsius. The heat transferred to the PCM 
changes it from the solid phase to the liquid phase. In this state, the 
water is ready for use. In the absence of solar energy, i.e. when the sun 
sets, the network water returns to the storage tank from the bypass 
pipeline and receives the energy stored during the day in the PCM liquid. 
In this process, the water temperature increases with the PCM phase 
change. After that, the water enters the pipelines for consumption and 
this thermodynamic cycle continues. 
2.3. Governing equations 
An energy analysis is conducted to assess the amount of thermal 
energy stored by the solar collector utilizing Phase Change Material 
(PCM). The beneficial energy that raises the temperature of the water in 
the collector is expressed by Q
u
, which can be written at A
c 
level is as 
follows [ 45 ]: 
Q
u
= A
c
F
R
[ S   U ( T
c
  T
a
) ] (1)  
F
R
=
˙mC
p
A
c
U
[
1   e
 
[
A c UF
´
˙mC p
]
]
(2) 
This energy is equal to the difference between the energy received 
from the sun S(w/m2) and dissipated heating energy. F ′ is the collector 
efficiency factor which is calculated as below [ 45 ]: 
F
´
=
U
  1
t
W [ U
L
( D + ( W   D ) F ) ] +
1
π D
i
h
f
(3) 
where, U
t
, which may be computed as follows, is the overall heat 
transfer coefficient [ 45 ]: 
U
t
=
σ
 
T
a
+ T
p
) 
T
a
2
+ T
p
2
)
[
ϵ
p
+ 0
/
0425N
 
1   ϵ
p
) ]
  1
+
[
2N + f   1
ϵ g
]
  N
(4) 
In which N is the number of covering glasses, ε
p 
is the plane emission 
intensity, ε
g 
indicates the glass emission intensity (0/88), T
a 
is the 
ambience temperature, β is the collector gradient and h
w 
shows the co -
efficient of wind heat transfer. 
In this regard 3, U1 is the overall loss coefficient of the collector, 
which can be obtained from reference [ 46 ]. 
Finally, the value of QL is obtained from Eq. (9) : 
Q
L
= U
l
( T
in
  T ◦ ) (5) 
Also, f is expressed as Eq. (6) [ 46 ]. 
f =
 
1 + 0 . 089h
w
  0 . 1166h
w
ϵ
p
)
+ ( 1 + 0 . 07866N ) (6) 
In this study, with the goal to enhance the effectiveness of the solar 
heating system, the following functions are considered for optimization 
[ 46 ]: the discharge time of PCM ( t
PCM
) and net stored energy within the 
PCM ( Q
net
). 
Q
net
= Q
u
+ Q
L
(7) 
The length of time that water may be maintained warm without solar 
energy is known as the discharge time of PCM: 
t
PCM
=
Q
net
Q
u
(8) 
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 4 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
4
2.4. Optimization 
The priority of information is important in this type of optimization, 
and one of the methods of determining the priority of information is to 
determine the reference point. The reference point will determine the 
priority of the values to be entered into the target functions. The 
decomposition algorithm method can be used to determine the priority 
of information in multi-objective optimization of the evolutionary al -
gorithm and it is shown as MOEA/D. MOEA/D is one of the easy and 
efficient methods of MOEA, which has been used in solving engineering 
problems, work planning, resource stock control, etc. This method de -
composes a multi-objective optimization problem into several single- 
objective optimization problems. Then, from a population-based 
method, it solves these problems simultaneously. This algorithm is 
used in the present project by integrating its engineering problem. 
The design parameters of the system are the inner diameter of the 
tubes ( D ), the area of collector ( A
c
), and Total energy stored in PCM 
minus the energy stored in water. In this study decision variables are the 
very design parameters of the system. The MOEA/D method divides the 
multiple-purpose problem into a number of simultaneously optimized 
scalar optimizing sub-problems. This method uses weight vectors that 
are defined for each sub-problem to combine the goal functions into a 
single objective function. An illustration of an optimization with mul -
tiple objectives problem is the following: 
Min F ( x ) = ( f
1
( x ) , f
2
( x ) , … , f
m
( x ) )
T
Subject to x ∈ R
m
(9) 
In which R
m 
is the decision-making space with m number of objective 
functions with real values. 
Table 1 introduces the decision variables and the range of 
constraints. 
2.5. Response surface optimization method 
In traditional experimental design methods, only one factor was 
considered as a variable, and other factors were placed at a fixed level, 
and in this method, the mutual effects between variables were not 
studied, and the full effects of the factors in the process could not be 
shown. Also, to conduct the research, a large number of experiments 
were needed, which led to an increase in time and cost, as well as an 
increase in the consumption of reagents and materials. To overcome this 
problem, the response surface method, or RSM was proposed for opti -
mization studies. Response surface methodology is a set of statistical 
techniques and applied mathematics for building empirical models 
[ 47 , 48 ]. Fig. 2 shows the flowchart of the RSM method. 
2.6. TOPSIS method 
TOPSIS is a multi-indicator decision-making method for evaluating 
and prioritizing options based on criteria according to their distance 
from positive and negative ideals. The ideal solution is the one that in -
creases the benefit criterion and decreases the cost criterion. The 
optimal option is the option that has the smallest distance from the ideal 
solution and at the same time the farthest distance from the negative 
ideal solution. In the ranking of options by the TOPSIS method, the 
options that are most similar to the ideal solution are ranked higher. In 
Fig. 3 , the flowchart of the TOPSIS method is introduced [ 49 , 50 ]. 
2.7. LINMAP method 
The LINMAP method is one of the multi-criteria MCDM decision- 
making methods used to determine the weights of criteria and sub- 
criteria and to rank options. In the LINMAP method, the number of m 
options with n indices is shown by m point vectors in an n-dimensional 
space, and it is assumed that the DM will choose the options with the 
smallest distance to the ideal point in this space [ 51 , 52 ]. 
2.8. AHP method 
The Analysis Hierarchy Method (AHP) was developed by Saati in 
1980. This technique is a powerful and flexible method in the category 
of multi-criteria decision-making methods that can solve complex 
problems at different levels. For this reason, it is called a hierarchy 
model because it is entered in the form of a tree model and levels 
[ 53 , 54 ]. 
2.9. Method 
In this research, the storage system for solar heat is used. Energy 
Fig. 1. Schematic of the proposed system.  
Table 1 
Decision variables and the range of restrictions.  
Decision variable Lower 
bound 
Upper 
bound 
Diameter (m)  0.005  0.02 
Area (m
2
)  0.2  1 
Ac (m
2
)  0.26  0.38 
Total energy stored in PCM minus the energy stored 
in water [kJ]  
3100  3300  
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 5 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
5
analysis is used to evaluate the amount of thermal energy stored with the 
solar collector in PCM. Based on these studies and analyses, the system 
model is presented, system components are identified, and then pro -
gramming is done accordingly. The efficiency of the mentioned system is 
evaluated depending on the committees, and the real goals of achieving 
the highest efficiency are subordinated. To achieve maximum efficiency, 
several goals must be met at the same time. These goals should be 
defined after clarifying the models. In general, it can be said that there 
are two main functions of energy (Qnet) and imaginary time of PCM 
(tpcm), the first one should be maximized and the second one should be 
minimized. For this purpose, the MOEA/D optimization algorithm is 
used. The research methodology is presented in the Fig. 4 . 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Validation 
Due to the novelty of the study, and to increase the accuracy of the 
modeling, the validation of the research has been done. In the research 
of Luo et al. in 2021 [ 55 ], the thermal modeling of the solar collector 
with the presence of PCM materials was investigated. The results of this 
comparison are presented in Table 2 and it shows a comparative analysis 
of the experimental value and the simulated value of the collector outlet 
temperature with the addition of the ambient temperature change curve, 
and as the results show, the modeling has good accuracy. 
3.2. Results 
Based on the ideal values of the stored energy within the PCM, Fig. 5 
depicts the optimal values of the PCM ’ s discharge time. As it can be 
elicited from the figure, when the conditions for the maximum time of 
energy discharge in the PCM are met (the left side of the diagram), the 
amount of the stored energy is at its lowest values. On the other hand, it 
is evident that the optimized conditions for the maximum amount of 
energy storage in the PCM leads to the least time of available energy at 
night-time. The population of the computational data in the conditions 
of Fig. 5 is equal to 500. Only two design parameters of diameter (D) and 
contact area (A) can be manipulated by the optimization. Based on the 
desired optimum objective, these parameters must be determined and 
used in the development of the system. In the conditions of Fig. 6 , when 
7 h of heating is required during night-time ( t
PCM 
= 7 h), the optimum 
values of diameter and area are yielded as black points in Fig. 5 . If 6 h of 
heating during night-time is considered ( t
PCM 
= 6 h), optimal parameters 
are summarized in the blue stars. 
The fluctuations of energy discharge as a function of tube inner 
diameter are depicted in Fig. 7 . Other parameters are thought to be 
Fig. 2. Flowchart of RSM method.  
Fig. 3. Flowchart of the TOPSIS method.  
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 6 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
6
constants so that the impact of this parameter can be calculated. Table 3 
provides a list of constant parameters. 
Another decision variable is Ac , the effect of which on the variations 
in the energy discharge time and amount of stored energy in the PCM is 
shown in Fig. 8 . 
The blue line in Fig. 8 indicates the variations in t
PCM 
versus different 
values of storage tank area, while the red line exhibits the variations in 
Q
net 
versus storage tank area. As is observed, both the objective functions 
change linearly with storage tank contact area. The energy objective 
function of Q
net 
is more sensitive to the parameter of the area – compared 
to the objective function of t
PCM
. Finally, the net energy stored in the 
PCM with respect to the tube diameter is estimated. Table 4 expresses 
the conditions in which other parameters are kept constant and the ef -
fect of diameter is investigated. The change span of the diameter varies 
from   0.02 to 0.005. 
Fig. 9 represents the trend of variations in the net energy stored in 
the PCM ( Q
net
) for different values of the inner diameter. The trend is 
nonlinear and incremental. Therefore, by keeping the system conditions 
constant and increasing the diameter of the tube, the amount of energy 
stored in PCM also increases. 
Q
net 
responds more sensitively to as the tube diameter increases. So, 
Fig. 4. Methodology.  
Table 2 
Validation.  
Time Temperature (
◦
C) 
Current study Luo et al. 
6:00  305  306 
8:00  328.4  327.5 
10:00  358.9  360 
12:00  375  374 
14:00  363  363 
16:00  362  360 
18:00  330.5  330  
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 7 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
7
in larger diameters, the amount of Q
net 
variations is more tangible. In 
addition to the aforementioned issues, the decision-making and RSM 
techniques have been utilized to optimize the responses. In Fig. 10 , the 
optimal points that are obtained via the decision-making (DM) tech -
niques all coincide at a single point. In case of 7 h of discharge time ( t
pcm 
= 7 h), the energy stored in the PCM is equal to 3094 (kJ), whereas, for 
the discharge time of 6 h (t
pcm 
= 6 h) the amount of stored energy is 
equal to 3200 (kJ). It is worth mentioning the given values in Fig. 10 are 
obtained using the RSM method. Using the weighted Euclidean distance 
(di) on option Ai, the LINMAP technique assumes that the individual 
making the decision chooses the option from a collection of two po -
tential options that is closest to the desired result. The existing scales are 
converted into unified ones using the weights-related variable ( Wj ), 
which makes it evident how important the indexes are. In LINMAP 
scheme, a number of m choices with n indexes through m vector points 
are shown in a three-dimensional space, and it is assumed that DM opts 
the choices with the least distance to the ideal point in this space. LIN -
MAP is a point with the least distance from the ideal value. The TOPSIS 
technique, which Huang and Li first presented in 1981, remains one of 
the most effective multi-index methods for making decisions. This 
approach is predicated on the notion that the chosen option must be as 
far away as possible from both a positive ideal solution (the best state) 
and a negative ideal solution (the worst state). This model ’ s funda -
mental logic identifies both the positive ideal solution and the negative 
ideal solution. The best option is one that raises the profit criteria and 
lowers the cost standard. The best alternative is the one that deviates 
most from both the desirable ideal scenario and the unpleasant desired 
outcome. In other words, when rating options using the TOPSIS tech -
nique, options that are closest to the optimal solution are given a higher 
Fig. 5. MOEA/D optimal solution of the objective functions (net stored energy 
in PCM and energy discharge time). 
Fig. 6. Diameter and contact area parameters for the energy discharge times of 6 and 7 h.  
Fig. 7. Variations of energy discharge time versus the tube diameter.  
Table 3 
Conditions of variable diameter and fixed parameters.  
Parameter Unit Value 
Q
net 
(kJ) 309732e3 
˙m
w 
(kg/s) 0.009 
A
c 
(m
2
) 0.287 
m
PCM 
(kg) 10 
T
in_water 
(K) 293.05  
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 8 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
8
score. TOPSIS technique uses the worst value of the objective function in 
place of the ideal value. The ideal value is determined by taking the 
biggest value of the average created by the method known as AHP after 
standardizing the values of the goal functions. 
Response surface methodology (RSM) is a collection of mathematical 
methods determining the relation between one or more response 
variables and several independent variables under study. This method 
was first developed by Box and Wilson in 1951. RSM has previously been 
utilized as a collection of practical statistical and mathematical tools for 
creating experimental models. RSM aims to optimize response (i.e. the 
output variable), which is influenced by several independent variables 
(i.e. input variables). In RSM scheme, the construction of the response 
surface models is a repetitive process. Once an approximate model is 
attained, the goodness of fit index is used to examine whether the 
response is satisfactory or not. If the response is not confirmed, the 
estimation of the process starts again and further experiments are then 
conducted. 
It should be mentioned that in this research, the net amount of stored 
energy is shown by (Qnet) and it is investigated as the main objective 
function to increase the efficiency of the solar thermal collector. (tPCM) 
for the vital energy discharge time is considered as another objective 
function. The results show that the temperature value increases with the 
increase of time and considering that heat and temperature have a direct 
Fig. 8. Effects of the storage tank ’ s contact area on the outcomes of objective functions.  
Table 4 
Fixed conditions for determining the effect of diameter on Q
PCM
.  
Parameter Unit Value 
Q
PCM 
(kJ) 309732e3 
˙m
w 
(kg/s) 0.009 
A
c 
(m
2
) 0.287 
m
PCM 
(kg) 10 
T
in_water 
(K) 293.05  
Fig. 9. Changes of the net energy stored in PCM versus the inner diameter of 
the tube. 
Fig. 10. Optimal findings of using decision-making and RSM techniques.  
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 9 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
9
relationship, the amount of thermal energy increases with the increase 
of time and as a result, more energy will be stored. 
In order to investigate the solid PCM materials, three classes of these 
materials (i.e., hybrid salts, paraffin, and fatty acids) were considered 
and one material from each of these classes was randomly chosen and 
studied. Effects of these materials with respect to the objective functions 
of Q
net 
and t
PCM 
are shown in Figs. 11 and 12 . The characteristics of these 
materials are also shown in Table 5 . 
According to the results in Figs. 11 and 12 , fatty acids and paraffin at 
a high melting temperature slightly increase the energy discharge time 
and net stored energy. Also, it is shown that at a high melting temper -
ature, the hybrid salts, compared to paraffin and fatty acids, brings 
about a much greater increase in the energy discharge time and amount 
of net stored energy. Hybrid salts at a range of temperature from 0 to 150 
degrees of centigrade have a high latent heat. Besides, they have wide 
applications due to their high heat storage capacity and density. 
Fatty acids are mainly obtained from animal and vegetable sources, 
in addition, fatty acids are also produced from the oxidation of paraffin 
waxes. 
Latent heat storage by phase change materials (PCM) can be used as a 
solution for the stability of solar equipment. The development of 
nanotechnology has led to the emergence of a group of high- 
performance nanostructured materials that have the ability to absorb 
thermal energy and release it when needed, and have gradually found 
industrial applications. 
4. Conclusion 
The thermal collector systems possess a substantial energy storage 
and supply capacity. This study focuses on utilizing phase change ma -
terials (PCMs) for storing solar energy during the daytime. PCMs absorb 
latent or sensible heat, enabling them to store solar energy effectively. 
The solar thermal collector ’ s performance is optimized using the MOEA/ 
D multi-objective optimization algorithm, considering the objective 
functions of energy discharge time (tPCM) and net stored energy in PCM 
(Qnet). The investigation reveals that increasing the inner diameter of 
the tube in the collector system leads to an increase in the energy 
discharge time of the PCM (tPCM). Consequently, the heat accessibility 
during the night is prolonged. The relationship between tPCM and tube 
diameter is nonlinear, with higher diameters exhibiting a more signifi -
cant sensitivity to the energy discharge time compared to smaller di -
ameters. Both objective functions, tPCM and Qnet, demonstrate linear 
changes concerning the contact area. The variations in these functions 
are directly related to the area parameter. The analysis of net stored 
energy in PCM (Qnet) for different tube diameters shows a nonlinear 
increasing trend. Keeping the system conditions constant while 
increasing the tube diameter results in higher energy storage in PCM. 
Qnet is more sensitive to alterations in the inner tube diameter, partic -
ularly in larger diameters. Consequently, precise selection of the tube 
diameter is crucial when employing large tanks in a collector system, as 
it significantly impacts the amount of stored energy (Qnet). 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Ehsanolah Assareh: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, 
Visualization, Investigation, Supervision, Writing- Reviewing and Edit -
ing, Data curation. 
Amjad Riaz: Writing- Reviewing and Editing. 
Mehrdad Ahmadinejad: Data curation. 
Siamak Hoseinzadeh: Writing- Reviewing and Editing. 
Mohammad Zaheri Abdehvan: Software, Visualization, 
Fig. 11. Comparison of discharge time for different PCM materials.  
Fig. 12. Comparison of the stored energy for different PCM materials.  
Table 5 
Physical properties of different martials in this study [ 56 , 57 ].   
Parameter Unit Value 
Hybrid salt (disodium hydrogen 
phosphate dodecahydrate) 
Melting point 
◦
C  35 
Density kg/ 
m
3  
1522 
Solid-specific heat kJ/ 
kg K  
1.55 
Liquid ’ s specific 
heat 
kJ/ 
kg K  
2.51 
Specific melting 
latent heat 
kJ/kg  278.84 
Paraffin (C20-C33 paraffin) Melting point 
◦
C  50 
Density kg/ 
m
3  
912 
Liquid ’ s specific 
heat 
kJ/ 
kg K  
2.4 
Specific melting 
latent heat 
kJ/kg  189 
Solid-specific heat kJ/ 
kg K  
2.4 
Fatty acid (uric acid) Melting point 
◦
C  44 
Density kg/ 
m
3  
862 
Specific melting 
latent heat 
kJ/kg  178 
Solid-specific heat kJ/ 
kg K  
1.7 
Liquid ’ s specific 
heat 
kJ/ 
kg K  
2.3  
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 10 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
10
Investigation. 
Sajjad Keykhah: Data curation, Software. 
Tohid Jafarinejad: Data curation. 
Rahim Moltames: Data curation. 
Moonyong Lee: Supervision, Writing- Reviewing and Editing. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgment 
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of 
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) 
(2021R1A2C1092152). 
References 
[1] J. Xia, K. Zhu, Y. Jiang, Method for integrating low-grade industrial waste heat into 
district heating network, in: Building Simulation, Springer, 2016 . 
[2] M. Ahmadinejad, R. Moosavi, Energy and exergy evaluation of a baffled-nanofluid- 
based photovoltaic thermal system (PVT), Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 203 (2023) 
123775 . 
[3] M. Ahmadinejad, A. Soleimani, A. Gerami, The effects of a novel baffle-based 
collector on the performance of a photovoltaic/thermal system using SWCNT/ 
Water nanofluid, Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog. 34 (2022) 101443 . 
[4] M. Ahmadinejad, A. Soleimani, A. Gerami, Performance enhancement of a 
photovoltaic thermal (PVT) system with sinusoidal fins: a quasi-transient energy- 
exergy analysis, Int. J. Green Energy 20 (9) (2023) 978 – 996 . 
[5] S.A. Kalogirou, Solar thermal collectors and applications, Prog. Energy Combust. 
Sci. 30 (3) (2004) 231 – 295 . 
[6] J. Deng, X. Yang, R. Ma, Y. Xu, Study on the thermodynamic characteristic 
matching property and limit design principle of general flat plate solar air 
collectors (FPSACs), in: Building Simulation, Springer, 2016 . 
[7] J. Deng, X. Yang, Y. Xu, M. Yang, Entransy analysis on the thermal performance of 
flat plate solar air collectors, in: Building Simulation, Springer, 2017 . 
[8] M.H. Zahir, K. Irshad, M. Shafiullah, N.I. Ibrahim, A.K. Islam, K.O. Mohaisen, F.A. 
A. Sulaiman, Challenges of the application of PCMs to achieve zero energy 
buildings under hot weather conditions: a review, J. Energy Storage 64 (2023) 
107156 . 
[9] R. Kumar, A. Pandey, M. Samykano, B. Aljafari, Z. Ma, S. Bhattacharyya, V. Goel, 
I. Ali, R. Kothari, et al., Phase change materials integrated solar desalination 
system: an innovative approach for sustainable and clean water production and 
storage, Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 165 (2022) 112611 . 
[10] N. Mehla, A. Yadav, Experimental analysis of thermal performance of evacuated 
tube solar air collector with phase change material for sunshine and off-sunshine 
hours, Int. J. Ambient Energy 38 (2) (2017) 130 – 145 . 
[11] F. Guo, J. Zhang, M. Shan, X. Yang, Analysis on the optimum matching of collector 
and storage size of solar water heating systems in building space heating 
applications, in: Building Simulation, Springer, 2018 . 
[12] X. Chen, H. Yu, Y. Gao, L. Wang, G. Wang, The marriage of two-dimensional 
materials and phase change materials for energy storage, conversion and 
applications, EnergyChem 4 (2) (2022) 100071 . 
[13] W. Aftab, J. Shi, M. Qin, Z. Liang, F. Xiong, A. Usman, S. Han, R. Zou, Molecularly 
elongated phase change materials for mid-temperature solar-thermal energy 
storage and electric conversion, Energy Storage Mater. 52 (2022) 284 – 290 . 
[14] A. Raul, M. Jain, S. Gaikwad, S.K. Saha, Modelling and experimental study of latent 
heat thermal energy storage with encapsulated PCMs for solar thermal 
applications, Appl. Therm. Eng. 143 (2018) 415 – 428 . 
[15] Y. Zhou, Z. Liu, A cross-scale ‘material-component-system ’ framework for transition 
towards zero-carbon buildings and districts with low, medium and high- 
temperature phase change materials, Sustain. Cities Soc. (2022) 104378 . 
[16] W. Cui, T. Si, X. Li, X. Li, L. Lu, T. Ma, Q. Wang, Heat transfer enhancement of 
phase change materials embedded with metal foam for thermal energy storage: a 
review, Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 169 (2022) 112912 . 
[17] H.M. Ali, Phase change materials based thermal energy storage for solar energy 
systems, J. Build. Eng. 56 (2022) 104731 . 
[18] S.F. Ahmed, N. Rafa, T. Mehnaz, B. Ahmed, N. Islam, M. Mofijur, A.T. Hoang, 
G. Shafiullah, Integration of phase change materials in improving the performance 
of heating, cooling, and clean energy storage systems: an overview, J. Clean. Prod. 
364 (2022) 132639 . 
[19] A. Mourad, A. Aissa, Z. Said, O. Younis, M. Iqbal, A. Alazzam, Recent advances on 
the applications of phase change materials for solar collectors, practical 
limitations, and challenges: a critical review, J. Energy Storage 49 (2022) 104186 . 
[20] F. Harkouss, F. Fardoun, P.H. Biwole, Optimization approaches and climates 
investigations in NZEB — a review, in: Building Simulation, Springer, 2018 . 
[21] M.H. Jahangir, A. Khatibi, Using solar energy to meet thermal demand in smart 
buildings due to different climate conditions: cases of Iran, Int. J. Ambient Energy 
43 (1) (2022) 713 – 725 . 
[22] F. Aghbalou, F. Badia, J. Illa, Exergetic optimization of solar collector and thermal 
energy storage system, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 49 (7 – 8) (2006) 1255 – 1263 . 
[23] W. Lin, Z. Ma, H. Ren, S. Gschwander, S. Wang, Multi-objective optimisation of 
thermal energy storage using phase change materials for solar air systems, Renew. 
Energy 130 (2019) 1116 – 1129 . 
[24] S. Nekoonam, R. Roshandel, Modeling and optimization of a multiple (cascading) 
phase change material solar storage system, Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog. 23 (2021) 
100873 . 
[25] W. Lin, Z. Ma, S. Wang, M.I. Sohel, E.L. Cascio, Experimental investigation and 
two-level model-based optimisation of a solar photovoltaic thermal collector 
coupled with phase change material thermal energy storage, Appl. Therm. Eng. 
182 (2021) 116098 . 
[26] M. Mahfuz, M. Anisur, M. Kibria, R. Saidur, I. Metselaar, Performance investigation 
of thermal energy storage system with Phase Change Material (PCM) for solar 
water heating application, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transf. 57 (2014) 132 – 139 . 
[27] M. Huang, W. He, A. Incecik, M.K. Gupta, G. Kr ´olczyk, Z. Li, Phase change material 
heat storage performance in the solar thermal storage structure employing 
experimental evaluation, J. Energy Storage 46 (2022) 103638 . 
[28] H. Asgharian, E. Baniasadi, A review on modeling and simulation of solar energy 
storage systems based on phase change materials, J. Energy Storage 21 (2019) 
186 – 201 . 
[29] H. Shamsi, M. Boroushaki, H. Geraei, Performance evaluation and optimization of 
encapsulated cascade PCM thermal storage, J. Energy Storage 11 (2017) 64 – 75 . 
[30] S.M. Alirahmi, et al., Development and multi-criteria optimization of a solar 
thermal power plant integrated with PEM electrolyzer and thermoelectric 
generator, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 47 (57) (2022) 23919 – 23934 . 
[31] R. Asadi, et al., Optimisation of combined cooling, heating and power (CCHP) 
systems incorporating the solar and geothermal energy: a review study, Int. J. 
Ambient Energy 43 (1) (2022) 42 – 60 . 
[32] E. Assareh, et al., An extensive thermo-economic evaluation and optimization of an 
integrated system empowered by solar-wind-ocean energy converter for electricity 
generation – case study: Bandar Abas, Iran, Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog. 25 (2021) 
100965 . 
[33] E. Assareh, et al., Thermodynamic assessment of a cogeneration system with CSP 
Driven-Brayton and Rankine cycles for electric power and hydrogen production in 
the framework of the energy and water nexus, Energy Nexus 5 (2022) 100031 . 
[34] E. Assareh, et al., Techno-economic analysis of combined cooling, heating, and 
power (CCHP) system integrated with multiple renewable energy sources and 
energy storage units, Energ. Buildings 278 (2023) 112618 . 
[35] E. Assareh, et al., Optimization of geothermal- and solar-driven clean electricity 
and hydrogen production multi-generation systems to address the energy nexus, 
Energy Nexus 5 (2022) 100043 . 
[36] E. Assareh, et al., An integrated system for producing electricity and fresh water 
from a new gas-fired power plant and a concentrated solar power plant – case study 
– (Australia, Spain, South Korea, Iran), Renew. Energy Focus 44 (2023) 19 – 39 . 
[37] B. Azizimehr, et al., Thermoeconomic analysis and optimization of a solar micro 
CCHP by using TLBO algorithm for domestic application, Energy Sources, Part A 42 
(14) (2020) 1747 – 1761 . 
[38] M.A. Behrang, et al., Assessment of electricity demand in Iran ’ s industrial sector 
using different intelligent optimization techniques, Appl. Artif. Intell. 25 (4) (2011) 
292 – 304 . 
[39] A. Dezhdar, et al., Transient optimization of a new solar-wind multi-generation 
system for hydrogen production, desalination, clean electricity, heating, cooling, 
and energy storage using TRNSYS, Renew. Energy 208 (2023) 512 – 537 . 
[40] A. Dezhdar, et al., A transient model for clean electricity generation using solar 
energy and ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC) - case study: Karkheh dam - 
southwest Iran, Energy Nexus 9 (2023) 100176 . 
[41] M. Nedaei, et al., A comprehensive evaluation of the wind resource characteristics 
to investigate the short term penetration of regional wind power based on different 
probability statistical methods, Renew. Energy 128 (2018) 362 – 374 . 
[42] O. Rejeb, et al., Innovative integrated solar powered polygeneration system for 
green hydrogen, oxygen, electricity and heat production, Energy Convers. Manag. 
269 (2022) 116073 . 
[43] A. Ghafouri, R. Esmaily, A. Alizadeh, Numerical simulation of tank-treading and 
tumbling motion of red blood cell in the Poiseuille flow in a microchannel with and 
without obstacle, Iran. J. Sci. Technol. - Trans. Mech. Eng. 43 (2019) 627 – 638, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40997-018-0233-2 . 
[44] M.H. Ahmadi, M.A. Ahmadi, F. Pourfayaz, Thermodynamic analysis and 
evolutionary algorithm based on multi-objective optimization performance of 
actual power generating thermal cycles, Appl. Therm. Eng. 99 (2016) 996 – 1005 . 
[45] S.A. Kalogirou, Solar Energy Engineering: Processes and Systems, Academic Press, 
2013 . 
[46] S. Farahat, F. Sarhaddi, H. Ajam, Exergetic optimization of flat plate solar 
collectors, Renew. Energy 34 (2009) 1169 – 1174, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2008.06.014 . 
[47] D.L. Allaix, V.I. Carbone, An improvement of the response surface method, Struct. 
Saf. 33 (2) (2011) 165 – 172 . 
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
===== PAGE 11 =====
Journal of Energy Storage 73 (2023) 108990
11
[48] D.-Q. Li, et al., Response surface methods for slope reliability analysis: review and 
comparison, Eng. Geol. 203 (2016) 3 – 14 . 
[49] Y. Wang, et al., BMW-TOPSIS: a generalized TOPSIS model based on three-way 
decision, Inf. Sci. 607 (2022) 799 – 818 . 
[50] K. Zhang, J. Dai, A novel TOPSIS method with decision-theoretic rough fuzzy sets, 
Inf. Sci. 608 (2022) 1221 – 1244 . 
[51] I. Bereketli, et al., WEEE treatment strategies ’ evaluation using fuzzy LINMAP 
method, Expert Syst. Appl. 38 (1) (2011) 71 – 79 . 
[52] H.-C. Xia, et al., Fuzzy LINMAP method for multiattribute decision making under 
fuzzy environments, J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 72 (4) (2006) 741 – 759 . 
[53] M. Naderi, et al., Hierarchical Q-learning-enabled neutrosophic AHP scheme in 
candidate relay set size adaption in vehicular networks, Comput. Netw. 235 (2023) 
109968 . 
[54] M. Kurttila, et al., Utilizing the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) in SWOT analysis 
— a hybrid method and its application to a forest-certification case, Forest Policy 
Econ. 1 (1) (2000) 41 – 52 . 
[55] Q. Luo, et al., Thermal modeling of air-type double-pass solar collector with PCM- 
rod embedded in vacuum tube, Energy Convers. Manag. 235 (2021) 113952 . 
[56] P. Lian, R. Yan, Z. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Sheng, Thermal performance 
of novel form-stable disodium hydrogen phosphate dodecahydrate-based 
composite phase change materials for building thermal energy storage, Adv. 
Compos. Hybrid Mater. 6 (2) (2023) 74 . 
[57] D. Cabaleiro, F. Agresti, L. Fedele, S. Barison, C. Hermida-Merino, S. Losada- 
Barreiro, S. Bobbo, M. Pi ˜neiro, Review on phase change material emulsions for 
advanced thermal management: design, characterization and thermal 
performance, Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 159 (2022) 112238 . 
E. Assareh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 