
--- PAGE 1 ---
The potential of machine learning to predict melting response time of phase 
change materials in triplex-tube latent thermal energy storage systems
☆
Peiliang Yan
a
, Chuang Wen
b , *
, Hongbing Ding
c
, Xuehui Wang
d
, Yan Yang
e , *
a
School of Energy and Power Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
b
School of the Built Environment, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6AH, United Kingdom
c
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
d
School of Mechanical & Materials Engineering, University College Dublin, Dublin D04 V1W8, Ireland
e
Faculty of Environment, Science and Economy, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QF, United Kingdom
HIGHLIGHTS
• Y-shaped fins to enhance phase change material charging performance in latent thermal energy storage systems.
• Predicting melting response time using four machine learning methods.
• Evaluation of model performance using mean square error and coefficient of determination.
• Conducted Feature importance evaluation to guide fin improvements.
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Phase change material
Thermal energy storage
Machine learning
Melting response time
XGBoost algorithm
ABSTRACT
Accurate prediction of the melting response time is vital for optimizing thermal energy storage systems, which 
play a key role in addressing the temporal mismatch between thermal energy demand and supply in the built 
environment. This study aims to quantitatively predict the melting response time of a novel triplex-tube thermal 
energy storage system incorporating phase change materials and Y-shaped fins to enhance heat transfer. A nu -
merical model based on the enthalpy-porosity method was developed to simulate the melting process, resulting 
in a dataset comprising 60 cases with melting response times ranging from 15 to 45 min under varying design 
and operational conditions. The key parameters investigated include fin angle (10
◦
– 30
◦
), fin width (5 – 15 mm), 
and heat transfer fluid temperature (60 
◦
C – 80 
◦
C). Prior to model development, variable independence was 
validated to ensure robust predictions. Four machine learning algorithms — polynomial regression, support vector 
regression, random forest regression, and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) — were employed, with hyper -
parameter optimization performed using a Bayesian approach. The XGBoost model demonstrated superior pre -
dictive capability, achieving an accuracy of 92 %. Feature importance analysis revealed that fin width and heat 
transfer fluid temperature were the dominant factors, contributing 51 % and 47 % to the prediction variance, 
respectively, whereas fin angle had a marginal influence of 2 %. This work provides a novel application of 
machine learning techniques to the design and optimization of thermal energy storage systems, offering valuable 
insights into improving their melting performance and operational efficiency.
1. Introduction
In the last century, the global average temperature has risen signif -
icantly, primarily due to industrialization. According to the 6th 
Assessment Report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC, 2023), global surface temperatures have increased by 
1.09 
◦
C [ 1 ]. This rise in temperature poses serious challenges, prompting 
various industries to recognize the urgent need to adopt renewable en -
ergy sources to reduce carbon emissions [ 2 – 4 ]. For instance, many 
modern urban buildings are now using solar collectors to supply heating 
[ 5 ]. However, a major issue is that peak heating demand often does not 
align with when solar energy is available [ 6 ]. To address this mismatch, 
the main solutions involve electrical options and thermal energy storage 
☆
This article is part of a Special issue entitled: ‘Decarbonize the Industry(Zishuai Bill Zhang) ’ published in Applied Energy.
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: c.wen@reading.ac.uk (C. Wen), y.yang7@exeter.ac.uk (Y. Yang). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Energy
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/apene rgy
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2025.125863
Received 26 January 2025; Received in revised form 26 March 2025; Accepted 3 April 2025  
Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
Available online 10 April 2025 
0306-2619/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
--- PAGE 2 ---
(TES) [ 7 ]. While electrical systems can provide flexibility, they often 
rely on fossil fuels, leading to higher carbon emissions. In contrast, TES 
systems store solar energy as heat, resulting in lower emissions and a 
more sustainable approach to achieving carbon neutrality in the built 
environment.
TES can be divided into three types: sensible, latent, and thermo -
chemical energy storage [ 8 ]. Latent heat storage, which uses phase 
change materials (PCMs), has gained considerable interest in recent 
years [ 9 ]. This technology allows for the efficient storage and release of 
energy at nearly constant temperatures while maintaining a high energy 
storage density [ 10 ]. Its applications extend across various fields, such 
as the food industry [ 11 ], battery thermal management [ 12 ], distributed 
heat supply systems [ 13 ], solar thermal supply [ 14 ] and other fields 
[ 15 – 17 ].
A common component of latent heat storage systems is the triplex- 
tube latent thermal energy exchanger. This system consists of three 
tubes arranged to form three channels: the inner and outer channels are 
filled with heat transfer fluid (HTF), while the middle channel contains 
the PCM [ 18 ]. During the charging process, the PCM in the middle 
channel absorbs heat and begins to melt, effectively storing energy. 
When there is a demand for heating, the stored thermal energy can be 
released back into the system, providing a reliable source of heat even 
when solar energy is not available.
However, the poor thermal conductivity of PCMs results in a slow 
rate of energy release, which limits their application [ 19 ]. Therefore, 
researchers have conducted some studies on the enhancement of melting 
speed in PCM. Common heat transfer enhancement techniques include 
inserting fins [ 20 ], adding nanoparticles [ 21 ], etc. While these methods 
slightly reduce the volume proportion of PCM in the middle channel of a 
triplex-tube latent thermal energy exchanger, they can significantly 
improve the heat transfer rate and yield better results. Importantly, the 
chemical stability of PCMs remains intact, even after many charging 
cycles [ 22 ].
Factors such as fin length [ 23 ], initial temperature [ 24 ], and many 
other parameters can greatly affect the heat transfer performance of 
triplex-tube latent thermal energy storage systems. It is essential to 
understand how different parameters influence the heat transfer effect 
when designing new systems. To quantify these impacts, researchers 
have conducted numerous studies.
Direct measurement of the melt time of TES systems using experi -
mental method is an accurate way to obtain heat transfer performance. 
In contrast, more researchers are using numerical simulation methods to 
obtain melt time because of the high cost of manufacturing components 
for different experiments in different conditions. In triplex-tube TES 
systems, researchers have designed a variety of fins [ 25 – 27 ] and tested 
them using simulation methods to reduce costs and enhance efficiency.
To accelerate the optimization process, researchers use faster pre -
dictive models to replace time-consuming simulation methods. One 
approach is the empirical formula method, where researchers derive 
data through experimentation or simulation and then fit it into mathe -
matical formulas. Rieger was among the first to summarize empirical 
formulas related to the heat transfer performance of phase change ma -
terials, providing empirical formulas for the Nusselt number in relation 
to the Rayleigh number for a PCM in a heated cylinder [ 28 ]. Wang 
summarized empirical formulas for the melting behavior of a heated 
vertical wall in a rectangular enclosure [ 29 ]. Assis presented an 
empirical formula for the melting of PCM inside a spherical shell [ 30 ]. 
Chabot et al. described the relationship between the solid crust dimen -
sion of periodically heated horizontal tubes and three dimensionless 
numbers: the Prandtl number, Stefan number, and Rayleigh number 
[ 31 ]. Despite these contributions, the empirical formula method has 
notable shortcomings. The equations take various forms, often failing to 
accurately represent the actual relationships between variables, making 
them applicable only to specific scenarios. When attempting to extend 
these formulas to new situations, their forms may need adjustment or 
entirely new formulas may have to be developed. Additionally, the 
prediction accuracy of these formulas can be limited, leading to signif -
icant errors under certain conditions. These limitations have driven re -
searchers to seek new prediction methods.
Machine learning has emerged as a powerful prediction tool in recent 
decades, attracting the interest of researchers across various industries 
[ 32 – 34 ]. In the field of phase change material based TES system re -
searches, Ermis et al. used artificial neural networks (ANN) to predict 
the thermal storage capacity of a PCM-based finned tube thermal storage 
system [ 35 ]. Fini et al. applied the ANN approach to identify optimal 
working conditions for PCM-based battery cooling [ 36 ]. Walker et al. 
developed an algorithm that predicts the remaining time for a PCM to 
reach a target melting fraction in real time for an electronic device 
cooling system, also using an ANN [ 37 ]. These examples demonstrate 
that machine learning methods for predicting heat transfer performance 
related to PCMs offer significant advantages.
For predicting the melting time of the TES system, traditional 
methods have been the mainstream approach, as previously discussed, 
and these methods have been widely applied across different TES 
Nomenclature
English symbols
C model constants
c heat capacity [J/kg ⋅ K]
g gravity constant [m/s
2
]
H latent heat [J/kg]
k thermal conductivity [W/m ⋅ K]
p pressure [Pa]
S source term
T temperature [K]
t time [s]
u fluid velocity in x direction [m/s]
v fluid velocity in y direction [m/s]
Greek symbols
β thermal expansion coefficient [1/K]
ε model constants
θ fin angle [
◦
]
λ local liquid fraction
μ dynamic viscosity [Pa ⋅ s]
ρ density [kg/m
3
]
Subscripts
l liquid
m melting
p constant pressure
s solid
ref reference
Abbreviations
HTF heat transfer fluid
MSE mean square error
PCM phase change material
PR polynomial regression
R
2
coefficient of determination
RFR random forest regression
SVR support vector regression
TES thermal energy storage
XGboost extreme gradient boosting
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
2 
--- PAGE 3 ---
systems. However, in recent years, data-driven machine learning tech -
niques have gained popularity for their ability to quickly predict melting 
outcomes, thus circumventing the lengthy numerical simulation pro -
cesses. To create meta-models of the first-principle simulation model for 
this scenario, it is essential to explore various types of machine learning 
models in order to identify an effective model for predicting melting 
time.
In our previous work, we established a triplex-tube PCM-TES system 
featuring novel Y-shaped fins and qualitatively analyzed the effects of 
various parameters [ 38 ]. Building on these findings, the present study 
aims to enhance the prediction of melting response time in this triplex- 
tube latent thermal energy storage (TES) system using machine learning 
techniques. To achieve this aim, the following objectives have been 
identified: developing predictive models, evaluating their performance, 
conducting sensitivity analysis, optimizing hyperparameters, and 
providing design guidelines.
2. Dataset
2.1. TES system
The research object of the study is a triplex-tube novel thermal en -
ergy storage system. PCMs are used to store thermal energy, with Y- 
shaped fins for heat transfer enhancement, which has a cross-sectional 
structure as shown in Fig. 1 . The outer diameters of the three concen -
tric copper tubes from the outside to the inside are 200 mm, 150 mm and 
50.8 mm respectively, and the wall thicknesses are 2 mm, 2 mm and 1.2 
mm respectively. The fins are attached to the inner and middle tubes of 
the middle annular region and staggered, respectively. The total cross- 
sectional area of the Y-fin is fixed as 2 % of the cross-sectional area of 
the system, and the length of the branch fins is twice the length of the 
root fin, making the structure of the Y-fin in this case controlled by three 
parameters (See Fig. 2 ). The explanation of the parameters and their 
values are given in Table 1 . In this study, RT82 was used as the PCM and 
copper was used as the material for the fins as well as the tubes, the 
physical properties of which are shown in Table 2 .
2.2. Simulation method
The dataset for this study was obtained by the same numerical 
simulation method as in the previous work [ 38 ]. The enthalpy-porosity 
method is a commonly used approach for simulating solid-liquid phase 
changes [ 39 ]. The enthalpy-porosity model treats the mushy zone as a 
porous medium when the solids are melting and equates the liquid phase 
volume fraction to the porosity of the porous medium to represent the 
melting process. The model is controlled by:
Continuity equation: 
∂ρ
∂ t
+
∂ ( ρ u )
∂ x
+
∂ ( ρ v )
∂ y
= 0 (1) 
The momentum sink caused by solidification are expressed by source 
terms [ 40 ] in the enthalpy-porosity model, and the momentum equa -
tions are: 
Fig. 1. Cross-section of the object TES system.
Fig. 2. The computational domain.
Table 1 
The explanation and value of the parameters.
Parameters Unit Explanation Values
Fin width mm Fin short side dimensions 0.5,1,1.5,2
Fin angle
◦
Y-shaped fin branch angle 30,60,90
HTF 
temperature
K
HTF temperature during 
discharging energy process
363 ， 365.5 ， 368 ， 
370.5 ， 373
Table 2 
The explanation and value of the parameters.
Property RT82 Copper
ρ [kg/m
3
] 770 8920
c
p 
[J/kg ⋅ K] 2000 381
k [W/m ⋅ K] 0.2 387.6
μ [Pa ⋅ s] 0.03499 –
H [J/kg] 176,000 –
T
s 
[K] 350.15 –
T
l 
[K] 358.15 –
β [1/K] 0.001 –
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
3 
--- PAGE 4 ---
∂ ( ρ u )
∂ t
+
∂ ( ρ uu )
∂ x
+
∂ ( ρ vu )
∂ y
=  
∂ p
∂ x
+
∂
∂ x
(
μ
∂ u
∂ x
)
+
∂
∂ y
(
μ
∂ u
∂ y
)
+ uA (2) 
∂ ( ρ v )
∂ t
+
∂ ( ρ uv )
∂ x
+
∂ ( ρ vv )
∂ y
=  
∂ p
∂ y
+
∂
∂ x
(
μ
∂ v
∂ x
)
+
∂
∂ y
(
μ
∂ v
∂ y
)
+ vA + ρ g β ( T   T
m
)
(3) 
A in the source terms can be computed using the porosity function: 
A =   C
( 1   λ )
2
λ
3
+ ε
(4) 
λ is the liquid fraction of the PCM throughout this study, which is 
calculated as 
λ =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0 , T < T
s
T   T
s
T
l
  T
s
, T
s
< T < T
l
1 , T > T
l
(5) 
The mushy zone constant C is a key element of the Carman-Kozeny 
equation, which adds a damping term to the momentum equation, 
modeling fluid flow in the mushy zone as flow through a porous medium 
[ 41 ]. The constant can be obtained through empirical correlation Eqs. 
[ 42 ]. For most calculations, the recommended values are between 10
4 
and 10
7
. After our adjustments, this model selects C = 10
6
. ε is simply an 
arbitrary minimum protection against a denominator of zero, which is 
set to be ε = 0.001.
Energy equation with external heat source term: 
∂ ( ρ h )
∂ t
+
∂ ( ρ uh )
∂ x
+
∂ ( ρ vh )
∂ y
=
∂
∂ x
(
k
∂ T
∂ x
)
+
∂
∂ y
(
k
∂ T
∂ y
)
+ S (6) 
h is defined as 
h =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
∫
T
T
ref
c
p
dT , T < T
s
∫
T s
T
ref
c
p
dT + λ H , T
s
< T < T
l
∫
T s
T
ref
c
p
dT + H +
∫
T
T
l
c
p
dT , T > T
l
(7) 
T could be calculated as 
T = λ ( T
l
  T
s
) + T
s
(8) 
The following assumptions were used in the computational 
modeling: (1) the melted liquid flow in the middle annular region during 
the process appears to be transient, laminar, and incompressible; (2) the 
HTF temperature is constant in each case; (3) the PCM thermophysical 
properties remain constant throughout the range of involved case tem -
peratures, and the PCM density is dominated by Boussinesq ’ s hypothe -
sis; (4) throughout the phase transition process of PCM, there is no 
volume variation, heat dissipation from the outer wall, and radiative 
heat transmission; and (5) at the boundary, there is no slip resulting 
from shear force.
2.3. Model validation
The geometry of this thermal energy storage system is straightfor -
ward, and its two-dimensional characteristics are prominent, thereby 
making the utilization of a 2D model for modeling and analysis a more 
efficient choice in terms of computational resource consumption. Pre -
vious researchers have also used this method for model simplification 
[ 43 ]. A 2D model, consistent with the previous investigations conducted 
by our research group, was implemented for simulation purposes [ 38 ]. 
The model simplifies the structures of the tube walls in contact with the 
PCM and replaces them with thermostatic boundary conditions. The grid 
employed in this paper is presented in Fig. 3 . The computational grid 
utilized in this study is illustrated in Fig. 3 and comprises a combination 
of quadrilateral and triangular elements. Numerical simulation calcu -
lations were performed using Ansys fluent software, with the initial 
temperature state of the PCM set at 300 K.
The mesh independence validation as well as the model validation 
are the same as the previous work of our group [ 38 ]. The experimental 
data from Al-Abidi [ 44 ] were used for the grid independence validation, 
and simulations were carried out under the same working conditions as 
the experiments with the grid numbers 16,117, 49,908, and 80,258. The 
results of the simulations are shown in Fig. 4 (a), which indicate that 
considering the number of grids in the model as well as the accuracy of 
the calculation, the final method of dividing the grid with the number of 
49,908 has been chosen. The verification of time step independence is 
shown in Fig. 4 (b). The influence of the three different time steps on the 
melting time is minimal. Ultimately, a time step of 0.3 s was determined 
to be the minimum.To ensure the accuracy of the model, it is necessary 
Fig. 3. The grid distribution.
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
4 
--- PAGE 5 ---
to validate the output results of different parameters [ 45 ]. The melting 
curves are analytically evaluated against the experimental data, and the 
information is shown in Fig. 4 (c). In addition, the model is compared 
with experiments from Safari [ 46 ] under the same boundary conditions 
to validate the model melting fraction. Both of them demonstrate that 
the results are in good correlation and the numerical model used in this 
study matches well with the actual melting process.
3. Methods
3.1. Variable correlation analysis
Before performing machine learning training, the first step is to do 
correlation analysis of the variables. Correlation analysis is a type of 
scientific procedure used in examining the relevance of correlation be -
tween two or multiple random variables with the same state, when the 
correlation between the variables is high, it can be assumed that there is 
a hidden link between the variables, and in order to improve the pre -
dictive precision of a model, it is essential to simplify the input variables 
with high correlation. The assessment of correlation is usually achieved 
by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient. The equation to 
calculate this coefficient r between variables j and k is 
r
j , k
=
∑
n
i = 1
[( j
i
  j ) ⋅ ( k
i
  k ) ]
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ̅̅̅̅ ̅
∑
n
i = 1
( j
i
  j )
2
√
⋅
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ̅̅̅
∑
n
i = 1
( k
i
  k )
2
√ (9) 
It is usually concluded that when the absolute value of Pearson ’ s 
correlation coefficient is less than 0.35 [ 47 ], two variables can be 
considered to show no correlation between them. The correlations were 
calculated separately for all the parameters and the results were plotted 
in the same matrix as shown in Fig. 5 . The results of Pearson ’ s correla -
tion coefficient between any two parameters shown in the figure indi -
cate that there is no significant correlation between the parameters.
Fig. 4. Validation study (a) mesh independence validation; (b) model validation of melting temperature [ 38 ]; (c) model validation of melting fraction.
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
5 
--- PAGE 6 ---
3.2. Polynomial regression algorithm
The polynomial regression (PR) algorithm is based on the linear 
regression algorithm. The linear regression algorithm considers the 
relationship between the independent variables of the dataset and the 
objective to be linear, and is able to establish the loss function equation 
through the use of the least square method, and optimise the loss 
function through the gradient descent method. The polynomial regres -
sion algorithm is a method of pre-processing the features of established 
datasets by considering them as multidimensional features and then 
fitting them to a linear regression.
3.3. Support vector regression algorithm
As an algorithm with good robustness, the support vector regression 
(SVR) algorithm is an algorithm for linearly fitting data in a high- 
dimensional space through supervised learning, which was first pro -
posed by Vapnik [ 48 ] and has become a popular machine learning al -
gorithm. The implementation process is mainly divided into two steps. 
The first step is data upgrading, i.e., transforming the difficult-to-fit low- 
dimensional nonlinear data into high-dimensional linear data by a 
specific kernel function; the second step is hyperplane fitting, i.e., 
finding a regression plane to make all the data of a set to the nearest 
distance to the plane, and this hyperplane is the ideal hyperplane. Once 
the algorithm is trained, model result prediction can be achieved by 
simply mapping the new data to the high-dimensional space using the 
same method. The structure of the support vector regression algorithm is 
shown in Fig. 6 .
Fig. 5. Correlation matrix of parameters.
Fig. 6. Support vector machine algorithm.
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
6 
--- PAGE 7 ---
3.4. Random forest algorithm
Integrated learning methods typically demonstrate high prediction 
accuracy. The random forest regression (RFR) algorithm [ 49 ] is an in -
tegrated learning algorithm that uses a large number of decision trees for 
regression prediction, aggregates the decision trees, and calculates the 
average of the outputs of each decision tree as the final regression pre -
diction result. Because each sub-decision tree is from the same data set, 
it is inevitable that each decision tree will produce correlation, which 
will affect the prediction results, therefore, RFR uses two ieideologies to 
achieve tree de-correlation, which are the bagging ideology [ 50 ] and the 
random subspace ideology [ 51 ]. The structure of the RFR model is 
shown in Fig. 7 .
3.5. XGBoost algorithm
As an integrated learning method, the extreme gradient boosting 
(XGBoost) [ 52 ] is a highly scalable gradient boosting algorithm based on 
decision trees. XGBoost is based on the concept of gradient boosting and 
generates decision trees separately and sequentially, where each tree 
learns from the residues of all the previous trees. Finally, the output 
predictions of these trees are aggregated to give the prediction result. 
The XGBoost algorithm avoids overfitting by integrating a regularisation 
term in the modeling process. The XGBoost algorithm has been sche -
matically illustrated in Fig. 8 .
3.6. Hyperparameter
There are two types of parameters in the training process of super -
vised machine learning algorithms, one can be obtained iteratively from 
the training process and is called the model parameter, while the other 
tuning parameter cannot be obtained iteratively and needs to be set 
manually by hand, which is called the hyperparameter. After these years 
of advancement of machine learning algorithms, researchers have come 
up with certain default values after empirical experiments on various 
datasets. The default values have no theoretical roots and are derived 
merely from experimental experience. In order to obtain better models, 
optimisation tuning strategies regarding predictive performance can be 
employed to select the values that are most suitable for the dataset under 
study.
3.7. Bayesian optimisation algorithm
Traditional optimisation algorithms, such as grid search, are 
computationally intensive and inefficient, making optimisation algo -
rithms that can improve efficiency the preferred choice of researchers. 
The Bayesian optimisation algorithm is a global search algorithm that is 
able to exploit prior knowledge [ 53 ]. The core idea of the Bayesian 
optimisation algorithm is to generate an initial set of candidate sample 
solutions for the function to be optimised, then assume a priori distri -
bution and continuously add candidate solutions, which are judged by a 
given scoring function to determine whether the candidate solutions are 
reasonable or not, and finally output the global maximum point of the 
candidate solutions after repeated iterations. It is an optimisation al -
gorithm with relatively low computational overhead.
3.8. Model assessment
The dataset in this study with a capacity of 60 was segmented, where 
70 % of the data point was partitioned into the training set, and the 
remaining 30 % of the data point was partitioned into the test set. This 
dataset is a full factorial dataset. A 3-fold cross-validation was adopted 
in the evaluation and the reason for not choosing more folds was due to 
the limit size of the dataset. Prediction models obtained by different 
machine learning algorithms need to be evaluated using the same 
quantitative metrics. There are two indicators called mean square error 
(MSE) as well as the coefficient of determination (R
2
) were chosen to 
evaluate the results of machine learning models in this scenario.
MSE is the average of the summation of the squares of the targeted 
predicted data deviations from their actual values. Given that y
i 
repre -
sents the actual value which corresponds to the predicted value h
i
( x
i
), 
the formula is 
MSE =
1
n
∑
n
i = 1
( h
i
( x
i
)   y
i
)
2
(10) 
R
2 
is the proportion of the dependent variable that could be 
explained by the regression relationship obtained by the fitted model for 
the target independent variable of a study. The model would have better 
interpretability if its R
2 
close to 1. The coefficient of determination can 
Fig. 7. Random forest regression algorithm.
Fig. 8. XGBoost algorithm.
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
7 
--- PAGE 8 ---
be calculated as 
R
2
= 1  
∑
n
i = 1
( y
i
  h
i
( x
i
) )
2
∑
n
i = 1
( y
i
  y
i
)
2
(11) 
4. Results and discussions
The numerical simulation results from the dataset employed in this 
study have been previously presented in the previous paper [ 38 ]; 
therefore, this paper will specifically concentrate on the results of the 
meta-models. The quantitative prediction results of this study do not 
separately summarize the effects of variables on melting time using the 
control variable method. Instead, they are aggregated within scatter 
plots to facilitate the observation of the reliability of the meta-model.
4.1. Hyperparameter tuning
The principles of each machine learning algorithm are different, and 
each algorithm weighs the efficiency of finding the global optimal so -
lution and the optimal model fitting to achieve the minimised deviation 
from the expected value in a different way. As a result, the numbers of 
key hyperparameters and their meanings vary from one algorithm to 
another. In this study, the hyperparameter tuning of all four machine 
learning algorithms is accomplished based on the Bayesian optimisation 
algorithm. The scoring metrics for the optimisation results are chosen to 
be R
2 
values, and hyper-parameters (e.g., the number of decision trees, 
etc.) for which the value needs to be an integer value during the iteration 
process are already rounded. The search intervals for each hyper -
parameter are given empirically. The hyperparameters that need to be 
rounded are already rounded during the tuning process. The final 
hyperparameters are taken to three significant digits to ensure that the 
results are sufficiently accurate. For each algorithm, the interpretation 
of each hyperparameter, the search space, and the final selected values 
are shown in Table 3 . The PR algorithm has only one hyperparameter, so 
a manual tuning method was chosen, and the selected final values of the 
hyperparameters for each of the remaining algorithms were obtained by 
iterating the Bayesian algorithm for 400 steps, where the first 200 steps 
of the iteration are random searches within the hyperparameter candi -
date range, and the last 200 steps of the iteration are fine searches near 
the optimum of the previous 200 steps. This study implements all ma -
chine learning algorithms in the environment of Python 3.9, and all 
machine learning experiments were performed on a PC equipped with 
Intel (R) Core (TM) i5-8300H (@ 2.30 GHz), 24 GB of RAM, and running 
the Windows 11 operating system.
4.2. Algorithms performance analysis
The physical model parameters are treated as independent variables, 
with the melting response time as the dependent variable, establishing a 
nonlinear mapping. The four machine learning algorithms previously 
described are then employed to identify the algorithm that achieves the 
highest accuracy in this context. Using the hyperparameters obtained 
from the search in Section 4.1 , the melting response time of the triplex- 
tube PCM-TES system was predicted with each algorithm, and the pre -
dicted results were compared with the actual results, as presented in 
Fig. 9 . The predictions of the training set as well as the test set are 
labelled in Fig. 9 , and the scatter points fall on the labelled auxiliary 
dotted lines when the predicted values are exactly the same as the actual 
values. From Fig. 9 , it can be found that among the four algorithms, the 
algorithm with the largest deviation between the training set and the 
test set results is the SVR algorithm, which means that there is an 
obvious overfitting phenomenon, while the test set and the training set 
of the other algorithms have roughly the same distribution on both sides 
of the auxiliary line. The RF algorithm has the largest deviation, espe -
cially in the region of higher values, which indicates that its prediction 
accuracy is insufficient. The best performing algorithm was XGboost, 
whose data were able to be distributed roughly precisely around the 
auxiliary line.
The residual plots of the prediction results of the four algorithms are 
presented in Fig. 10 . The results indicate that the residual value of the 
prediction results of the random forest algorithm is significantly higher 
than the other algorithms, and the maximum error of its prediction value 
is more than 15 min, and more results of high prediction value occur 
when the actual value is lower, while more results of low prediction 
value occur in the region of higher actual value. Both PR algorithm as 
well as SVR algorithm showed the prediction error close to 15 min for 
individual conditions, and the prediction accuracy of XGBoost algorithm 
was higher than the other algorithms, and its maximum error was 
approximately 5 min. With the exception of the RFR algorithm, the re -
siduals of the test set for the other algorithms are larger than the training 
set residuals, which corresponds to the results in Fig. 9 .
The prediction results were analyzed using the evaluation metrics 
presented in the previous section. The results of the mean square error 
comparison are presented in Fig. 11 (a), which can show that the data 
fitting quality of the training set is higher than that of the prediction set 
in general. The algorithm with the largest MSE gap is the SVR algorithm, 
which has an 11.8 times MSE gap in its predictions, indicating that the 
algorithm is overfitting more severely, meanwhile the PR algorithm is 
the best in terms of unbiasedness, which has an MSE difference of only 
1.15 times. From the perspective of the absolute error of the test set, 
XGboost is the optimal algorithm, although the MSE of its test set differs 
from that of the training set by about 4.84 times. The coefficient of 
Table 3 
Hyperparameter search spaces and chosen values.
Algorithm Hyperparameter Description Search space Value
PR degree
polynomial 
dimension
[ 1 , 10 ] 2
SVR
gamma
coefficients of the 
kernel function
(0.0001,100) 0.154
c penalty factor (0.1200) 186
epsilon
regularisation 
parameter range
(0.0001,100) 0.369
RFR
n_estimators tree number [10,500] 65
min_samples_leaf
samples minimum 
number required to 
be at a leaf node
[ 2 , 10 ] 2
max_depth
maximum depth of 
trees
[ 2 , 10 ] 7
min_samples_split
samples minimum 
number required to 
split an internal node
[ 2 , 5 ] 2
max_features
number of variables 
to consider
[0.100,0.999] 0.999
XGboost
n_estimators number of trees [10,500] 497
subsample
the training instances 
subsample ratio
[0.5,1) 0.933
max_depth
maximum depth of 
trees
[ 2 , 10 ] 46
min_child_weight
instance weight 
minimum sum 
needed in a child
[ 1 , 8 ] 2
reg_alpha
L1 regularisation 
term on weights
(0,1) 0.768
reg_lambda
L2 regularisation 
term on weights
(0,1) 0.529
learning_rate
Step reduction used 
for updates
(0,0.5] 0.389
gamma
minimum loss 
reduction required to 
make a further 
partition on a leaf 
node
(0,1) 0.544
colsample_bytree
subsample ratio of 
columns when 
constructing each 
tree
[0.5,1] 0.908
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
8 
--- PAGE 9 ---
determination metrics presented in Fig. 11 (b) exhibit similar findings, 
with the SVR algorithm having the lowest coefficient of determination 
for test set prediction results while the XGboost algorithm has the 
highest coefficient of determination for test set prediction results.
4.3. Feature importance evaluation
While traditional prediction methods such as empirical formulae can 
only qualitatively analyse the extent to which each parameter affects the 
melting response time, data-driven machine learning methods are able 
to quantitatively give this value directly and guide the subsequent 
design of the fin structure. The principle is to calculate the increase in 
model prediction error after substitution of features to measure the 
importance of the features. In this section, the importance of each 
parameter is evaluated. The predictions in this section are given based 
on the best-performing XGBoost algorithm. From the previous studies, it 
can be judged that both fin width and HTF temperature have a greater 
influence on the final melt rate, and from Fig. 12 , it can be found that the 
importance of fin width is 51 % while the importance of HTF 
temperature is 47 %. This indicates that the increase in fin heat transfer 
area contributes the most to the enhanced heat transfer. The change in 
fin angle has a lesser effect on the melting response time with only 2 % 
importance. This suggests that changes in fin structure style have a small 
effect on heat transfer performance, and subsequent research should 
focus more on how to increase the surface area of the fins at a low cost 
with a fixed fin cross-section area.
After all, when an algorithm is deemed ‘optimal ’ in a study, it is 
usually within the context of that specific research framework. This 
benchmarking establishes a baseline for future work, enabling re -
searchers to identify which algorithms merit further exploration under 
similar conditions. Additionally, current machine learning research 
increasingly emphasizes generalization and transfer learning — applying 
knowledge gained in one domain to another. Insights into the superior 
performance of XGBoost in a specific configuration can inspire adapta -
tions and modifications for different TES systems.
Although different types of PCMs or system configurations may lead 
to certain variations, the study demonstrates that machine learning al -
gorithms maintain comparable accuracy across datasets with similar 
Fig. 9. PCM melting response time model prediction result reaped by (a) PR (b)SVR( c )RF(d) XGboost.
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
9 
--- PAGE 10 ---
structural characteristics. The performance of these models is primarily 
influenced by the statistical properties of the dataset rather than the 
specific physical attributes of the materials. Datasets with analogous 
patterns, irrespective of material variations, tend to yield consistent 
algorithmic outcomes. While the trained models may not be directly 
transferable to entirely distinct configurations, the meta-model selection 
approach remains consistent. The adoption of algorithms, which 
perform well across datasets with similar distributions, ensures robust 
model selection, even in the presence of PCM or configuration varia -
tions. Thus, while dataset diversity can impact prediction accuracy, the 
overall framework for similar systems remains reliable [ 54 ].
Moreover, the scalability of the algorithm is advantageous. In anal -
ogous scenarios, the model can be efficiently retrained by incorporating 
a small amount of additional data, making it adaptable to new datasets 
without necessitating a complete retraining process. This flexibility 
enhances the model ’ s efficiency, particularly when managing evolving 
or expanded datasets within the same operational context.
5. Conclusions
This study explores the potential of machine learning-based meta- 
models in predicting the melting response time of phase change mate -
rials in triplex-tube latent thermal energy storage systems. By applying 
algorithms such as polynomial regression, support vector regression, 
random forest regression, and XGBoost, we constructed efficient pre -
dictive models that effectively replace traditional experimental and 
numerical methods.
The results show that the XGBoost algorithm outperforms others, 
achieving the highest accuracy and lowest prediction error. In contrast, 
support vector regression exhibits significant overfitting in the testing 
set, highlighting the need for appropriate meta-models to ensure reliable 
predictions. Sensitivity analysis based on XGBoost identifies key factors 
influencing melting response time, with fin width and heat transfer fluid 
temperature contributing 51 % and 47 %, respectively, while the fin 
angle has a minor effect at 2 %. These findings guide future design ef -
forts, emphasizing the optimization of fin design to enhance heat 
Fig. 10. PCM melting response time prediction residual errors of (a) PR (b)SVR( c )RF(d) XGboost.
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
10 
--- PAGE 11 ---
transfer efficiency. Machine learning-based meta-models hold great 
promise for the design and optimization of latent thermal energy storage 
systems, improving prediction accuracy and providing data-driven 
support for engineering decisions.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Peiliang Yan: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal anal -
ysis, Conceptualization. Chuang Wen: Writing – review & editing, Su -
pervision, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Hongbing 
Ding: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Xue -
hui Wang: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. Yan Yang: 
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, 
Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] IPCC. Climate change 2023 synthesis report. 2023.
[2] Pouresmaieli M, Ataei M, Nouri Qarahasanlou A, Barabadi A. Integration of 
renewable energy and sustainable development with strategic planning in the 
mining industry. Results Eng 2023;20:101412 .
[3] Hassan AA, El-Rayes K. Optimal use of renewable energy technologies during 
building schematic design phase. Appl Energy 2024;353:122006 .
[4] Chen X, Xi X, Zhang L, Wang Z, Cui Z, Long W. Experimental study on nucleation 
and micro-explosion characteristics of emulsified heavy fuel oil droplets at elevated 
temperatures during evaporation. Appl Therm Eng 2023;224:120114 .
[5] Abu-Hamdeh NH, Khoshaim A, Alzahrani MA, Hatamleh RI. Study of the flat plate 
solar collector ’ s efficiency for sustainable and renewable energy management in a 
building by a phase change material: containing paraffin-wax/graphene and 
paraffin-wax/graphene oxide carbon-based fluids. J Build Eng 2022;57:104804 .
[6] Mahdi JM, Nsofor EC. Melting enhancement in triplex-tube latent heat energy 
storage system using nanoparticles-metal foam combination. Appl Energy 2017; 
191:22 – 34 .
[7] Yan P, Fan W, Han Y, Ding H, Wen C, Elbarghthi AFA, et al. Leaf-vein bionic fin 
configurations for enhanced thermal energy storage performance of phase change 
materials in smart heating and cooling systems. Appl Energy 2023;346:121352 .
[8] Jain S, Kumar KR, Rakshit D. Heat transfer augmentation in single and multiple 
(cascade) phase change materials based thermal energy storage: research progress, 
challenges, and recommendations. Sustain Energy Technol Assess 2021;48: 
101633 .
[9] Abilkhassenova Z, Memon SA, Ahmad A, Saurbayeva A, Kim J. Utilizing the Fanger 
thermal comfort model to evaluate the thermal, energy, economic, and 
environmental performance of PCM-integrated buildings in various climate zones 
worldwide. Energ Build 2023;297:113479 .
[10] Choure BK, Alam T, Kumar R. A review on heat transfer enhancement techniques 
for PCM based thermal energy storage system. J Energy Storage 2023;72:108161 .
[11] Sarkar S, Mestry S, Mhaske ST. Developments in phase change material (PCM) 
doped energy efficient polyurethane (PU) foam for perishable food cold-storage 
applications: a review. J Energy Storage 2022;50:104620 .
[12] Khan MM, Alkhedher M, Ramadan M, Ghazal M. Hybrid PCM-based thermal 
management for lithium-ion batteries: trends and challenges. J Energy Storage 
2023;73:108775 .
[13] Du K, Calautit J, Eames P, Wu Y. A state-of-the-art review of the application of 
phase change materials (PCM) in mobilized-thermal energy storage (M-TES) for 
recovering low-temperature industrial waste heat (IWH) for distributed heat 
supply. Renew Energy 2021;168:1040 – 57 .
[14] Goel V, Dwivedi A, Kumar R, Kumar R, Pandey AK, Chopra K, et al. PCM-assisted 
energy storage systems for solar-thermal applications: review of the associated 
problems and their mitigation strategies. J Energy Storage 2023;69:107912 .
[15] Li S, Zou K, Sun G, Zhang X. Simulation research on the dynamic thermal 
performance of a novel triple-glazed window filled with PCM. Sustain Cities Soc 
2018;40:266 – 73 .
[16] Agarwal P, Prabhakar A. Energy and thermo-economic analysis of PCM integrated 
brick in composite climatic condition of Jaipur - a numerical study. Sustain Cities 
Soc 2023;88:104294 .
[17] Zavrl E, Tomc U, El Mankibi M, Dovjak M, Stritih U. Parametric study of an active- 
passive system for cooling application in buildings improved with free cooling for 
enhanced solidification. Sustain Cities Soc 2023;99:104960 .
[18] Al-Abidi AA, Bin Mat S, Sopian K, Sulaiman MY, Lim CH, Th A. Review of thermal 
energy storage for air conditioning systems. Renew Sust Energ Rev 2012;16: 
5802 – 19 .
[19] Xu B, Lu S, Zheng J. Thermodynamic optimization of cascaded PCMs charge 
process based on entransy dissipation extreme principle. Sustain Cities Soc 2023; 
93:104521 .
Fig. 11. The assessment scores for the four algorithm (a) MSE (b)R
2
.
Fig. 12. Feature importance evaluation.
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
11 
--- PAGE 12 ---
[20] Palmer B, Arshad A, Yang Y, Wen C. Energy storage performance improvement of 
phase change materials-based triplex-tube heat exchanger (TTHX) using 
liquid – solid interface-informed fin configurations. Appl Energy 2023;333 .
[21] Nitsas M, Koronaki IP. Performance analysis of nanoparticles-enhanced PCM: an 
experimental approach. Thermal Sci Eng Progress 2021;25:100963 .
[22] Saraf SD, Panda D, Gangawane KM. Performance analysis of hybrid expanded 
graphite-NiFe2O4 nanoparticles-enhanced eutectic PCM for thermal energy 
storage. J Energy Storage 2023;73:109188 .
[23] Huang X, Yao S, Yang X, Zhou R, Luo J, Shen X. Comparison of solidification 
performance enhancement strategies for a triplex-tube thermal energy storage 
system. Appl Therm Eng 2022;204:117997 .
[24] Huang X, Yao S, Yang X, Zhou R. Melting performance assessments on a triplex- 
tube thermal energy storage system: optimization based on response surface 
method with natural convection. Renew Energy 2022;188:890 – 910 .
[25] Liu J, Liu Z, Nie C. Phase transition enhancement through circumferentially 
arranging multiple phase change materials in a concentric tube. J Energy Storage 
2021;40:102672 .
[26] Al-Abidi AA, Mat S, Sopian K, Sulaiman MY, Mohammad AT. Numerical study of 
PCM solidification in a triplex tube heat exchanger with internal and external fins. 
Int J Heat Mass Transf 2013;61:684 – 95 .
[27] Zonouzi SA, Dadvar A. Numerical investigation of using helical fins for the 
enhancement of the charging process of a latent heat thermal energy storage 
system. J Energy Storage 2022;49:104157 .
[28] Rieger H, Projahn U, Beer H. Analysis of the heat transport mechanisms during 
melting around a horizontal circular cylinder. Int J Heat Mass Transf 1982;25: 
137 – 47 .
[29] Wang Y, Amiri A, Vafai K. An experimental investigation of the melting process in a 
rectangular enclosure. Int J Heat Mass Transf 1999;42:3659 – 72 .
[30] Assis E, Katsman L, Ziskind G, Letan R. Numerical and experimental study of 
melting in a spherical shell. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2007;50:1790 – 804 .
[31] Chabot C, Gosselin L. Solid-liquid phase change around a tube with periodic 
heating and cooling: scale analysis, numerical simulations and correlations. Int J 
Therm Sci 2017;112:345 – 57 .
[32] Cai J, Xu K, Zhu Y, Hu F, Li L. Prediction and analysis of net ecosystem carbon 
exchange based on gradient boosting regression and random forest. Appl Energy 
2020;262:114566 .
[33] Yan P, Fan W, Zhang R. Predicting the NOx emissions of low heat value gas rich- 
quench-lean combustor via three integrated learning algorithms with Bayesian 
optimization. Energy 2023;273:127227 .
[34] Wallimann H, Sticher S. On suspicious tracks: machine-learning based approaches 
to detect cartels in railway-infrastructure procurement. Transp Policy 2023;143: 
121 – 31 .
[35] Ermis K, Erek A, Dincer I. Heat transfer analysis of phase change process in a 
finned-tube thermal energy storage system using artificial neural network. Int J 
Heat Mass Transf 2007;50:3163 – 75 .
[36] Fini AT, Fattahi A, Musavi S. Machine learning prediction and multiobjective 
optimization for cooling enhancement of a plate battery using the chaotic water- 
microencapsulated PCM fluid flows. J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 2023;148 .
[37] Chuttar A, Banerjee D. Machine learning (ML) based thermal Management for 
Cooling of electronics chips by utilizing thermal energy storage (TES) in packaging 
that leverages phase change materials (PCM). Electronics 2021;10:2785 .
[38] Yan P, Fan W, Yang Y, Ding H, Arshad A, Wen C. Performance enhancement of 
phase change materials in triplex-tube latent heat energy storage system using 
novel fin configurations. Appl Energy 2022;327:120064 .
[39] Ye W-B, Arıcı M. False diffusion, asymmetrical interface, and equilibrious state for 
pure solid-gallium phase change modeling by enthalpy-porosity methodology. Int 
Commun Heat Mass Transfer 2023;144:106746 .
[40] Brent AD, Voller VR, Reid KJ. Enthalpy-porosity technique for modeling 
convection-diffusion phase change: application to the melting of a pure metal. 
Numerical Heat Transfer 1988;13:297 – 318 .
[41] Hameter M, Walter H. Influence of the mushy zone constant on the numerical 
simulation of the melting and solidification process of phase change materials. 
Comput Aided Chem Eng 2016;38:439 – 44 .
[42] Ye W-B, Arıcı M. Exploring mushy zone constant in enthalpy-porosity methodology 
for accurate modeling convection-diffusion solid-liquid phase change of calcium 
chloride hexahydrate. Int Commun Heat Mass Transfer 2024;152:107294 .
[43] Ye W-B, Arıcı M. 3D validation, 2D feasibility, corrected and developed 
correlations for pure solid-gallium phase change modeling by enthalpy-porosity 
methodology. Int Commun Heat Mass Transfer 2023;144:106780 .
[44] Al-Abidi AA, Mat S, Sopian K, Sulaiman MY, Mohammad AT. Experimental study of 
melting and solidification of PCM in a triplex tube heat exchanger with fins. Energ 
Build 2014;68:33 – 41 .
[45] Ye W-B, Arıcı M. Redefined interface error, 2D verification and validation for pure 
solid-gallium phase change modeling by enthalpy-porosity methodology. Int 
Commun Heat Mass Transfer 2023;147:106952 .
[46] Safari V, Abolghasemi H, Darvishvand L, Kamkari B. Thermal performance 
investigation of concentric and eccentric shell and tube heat exchangers with 
different fin configurations containing phase change material. J Energy Storage 
2021;37:102458 .
[47] Taylor R. Interpretation of the correlation coefficient: a basic review. J Diagnostic 
Med Sonography 1990;6:35 – 9 .
[48] Cortes C, Vapnik V. Support-vector networks. Mach Learn 1995;20:273 – 97 .
[49] Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn 2001;45:5 – 32 .
[50] Breiman L. Bagging predictors. Mach Learn 1996;24:123 – 40 .
[51] Tin Kam H. The random subspace method for constructing decision forests. IEEE 
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 1998;20:832 – 44 .
[52] Chen T, Guestrin C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. Proceedings of the 
22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining: Association for Computing Machinery; 2016. p. 785 – 94, numpages = 10.
[53] Snoek J, Larochelle H, Adams RP. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine 
learning algorithms. Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Neural 
Information Processing Systems - Volume 2. Lake Tahoe, Nevada: Curran 
Associates Inc.; 2012. p. 2951 – 9.
[54] Uddin S, Lu H. Dataset meta-level and statistical features affect machine learning 
performance. Sci Rep 2024:14 .
P. Yan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125863 
12 